STATE
PLANNING
POLICY
5.2
Telecommunications
Infrastructure
September 2015
Prepared under Part Three of the Planning
and Development Act 2005 by the Western
Australian Planning Commission

click to follow
1 CITATION 1
2 POLICY INTENT 1
3 BACKGROUND 1
Disclaimer
This document has been published by the 3.1. Electromagnetic Emissions (EME) 1
Department of Planning on behalf of the
3.2. Where this policy applies 1
Western Australian Planning Commission. Any
representation, statement, opinion or advice 3.3. Above ground telecommunications
expressed or implied in this publication is
infrastructure 2
made in good faith and on the basis that the
Government, its employees and agents are 3.4. Below ground telecommunications
not liable for any damage or loss whatsoever
infrastructure 2
which may occur as a result of action taken
or not taken, as the case may be, in respect 3.5. Policy exemptions 3
of any representation, statement, opinion or
advice referred to herein. Professional advice 3.6. When this policy should be applied 3
should be obtained before applying the
3.7. Relationship of this policy to
information contained in this document to
particular circumstances. Commonwealth legislation 3
© Western Australian Planning Commission 4 POLICY OBJECTIVES 4
Published by the
Western Australian Planning Commission
Gordon Stephenson House 5 POLICY MEASURES 4
140 William Street
Perth WA 6000 5.1. Visual Impacts 4
Locked Bag 2506
Perth WA 6001 6 IMPLEMENTATION 5
Published September 2015
6.1. Local planning schemes and local
website: www.planning.wa.gov.au
planning policies 5
email: corporate@planning.wa.gov.au
6.2. Local structure planning 5
tel: 08 6551 9000
fax: 08 6551 9001 6.3. Development 5
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
infoline: 1800 626 477
7. DEFINITIONS 6
This document is available in alternative formats on
application to Communication Services.

STATE PLANNING POLICY 5.2 1
Telecommunications Infrastructure
1. CITATION 3. BACKGROUND Measurement surveys undertaken by ARPANSA
demonstrate that environmental radiofrequency levels
This is a State Planning Policy prepared under Part 3 of Adequate and reliable telecommunications are essential near base stations for the mobile telephone network are
the Planning and Development Act 2005. This policy may for all aspects of contemporary community life, from extremely low. The ARPANSA surveys reported that typical
be cited as State Planning Policy 5.2: Telecommunications supporting the State’s economy to creating and exposures to radiofrequency fields were well below
Infrastructure Policy. maintaining connected and cohesive social networks. one per cent of the Standard’s public exposure limits. It
Contact between emergency services and the community concluded that “given the very low levels recorded and the
After this policy has been gazetted, Statement of Planning
increasingly relies on the telecommunications networks. relatively low power of these types of transmitters, it is unlikely
Policy 5.2 Telecommunications Infrastructure (2004) will
that the radiofrequency radiation from base stations would
be repealed. The importance of telecommunications services in
cause any adverse health effects, based on current medical
Western Australia is recognised in the Western Australian
research”.
Planning Commission’s (WAPC’s) State Planning Strategy
2. POLICY INTENT 2050 (2014), which advocates for the provision of an Standards set by ARPANSA incorporate substantial safety
effective state-wide telecommunications network. margins to address human health and safety matters;
Installation of telecommunications network infrastructure This network includes both above and below ground therefore it is not within the scope of this Policy to address
usually involves the development of land and/or infrastructure to support both fixed line and wireless health and safety matters. Based on ARPANSA’s findings,
alteration to the appearance of buildings or structures, telecommunications. setback distances for telecommunications infrastructure
which may have visual impacts. This planning policy aims are not to be set out in local planning schemes or local
to balance the need for effective telecommunications planning policies to address health or safety standards for
3.1 Electromagnetic Emissions (EME)
services and effective roll-out of networks, with the human exposure to electromagnetic emissions.
community interest in protecting the visual character The use of mobile telephones has raised public
of local areas. Using a set of land use planning policy concern about possible health issues associated with 3.2 Where this policy applies
measures, the policy intends to provide clear guidance exposure to electromagnetic emissions. However,
pertaining to the siting, location and design of telecommunications carriers must comply with the This policy applies throughout Western Australia in
telecommunications infrastructure. Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) respect to above and below ground telecommunications
Radiocommunications Licence Conditions (Apparatus infrastructure other than those facilities exempted
Licence) Determination 2003. These licence conditions under the Commonwealth Telecommunications Act
make mandatory the limits in the Australian Radiation 1997 (Telecommunications Act). (See Section 3.5 Policy
Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency (ARPANSA) Exemptions for further information)
Radiofrequency (RF) Standard which sets limits for human
All other facilities constitute ‘development’ under the
exposure to RF electromagnetic fields from all sources,
Planning and Development Act 2005 and development
including telecommunications infrastructure. ARPANSA
approval may be required from the relevant planning
is the primary Commonwealth agency responsible for
authority. Separate approval may also be required from
protecting the health and safety of people and the
other government agencies under other legislation.
environment from the harmful effects of radiation.

STATE PLANNING POLICY 5.2 2
Telecommunications Infrastructure
3.3 Above ground more panels to existing towers, or by constructing new Anyone can listen to the amateur bands using a receiver,
telecommunications infrastructure towers. In areas of low mobile use, the cells are larger and but to transmit, operator qualifications and a licence
the antennae are mounted on taller masts and towers. issued by the Australian Communications and Media
For the purposes of this policy, above ground Association (ACMA) are required.
As telecommunications networks expand due to
telecommunications infrastructure refers to any line,
increasing demand for mobile telephone and data An amateur apparatus licence is issued to authorise a
equipment, apparatus, tower, antenna or any other
services, the location, siting and design of proposed station that:
structure that is visible above ground level.
facilities becomes critical.
a) is operated for the purposes of self-training in radio
3.3.1 Mobile telephone networks communications; intercommunication using radio
3.3.2 National Broadband Network
communications; and technical investigation into
Mobile telephone networks operate through base fixed wireless broadband towers
radio communications by persons who do so solely
stations, which incorporate a radio transmitter, a receiver
National Broadband Network (NBN) fixed wireless with a personal aim, and who have no pecuniary
and an antenna. Base stations provide coverage to a
broadband towers are usually bigger than mobile phone interest in the outcome of the operations of the
geographic area known as a ‘cell’, which may vary in size
towers, and are more likely to be required in metropolitan station;
but generally has a radius of up to 10 kilometres. Each cell
fringe and regional areas.
has its own transceiver which sends and receives radio b) is operated on amateur frequencies or amateur
signals throughout its specified zone. Fixed wireless technology can transmit data at broadband frequency bands; and
speeds using radio signals instead of cables. This c) may participate in the amateur-satellite service.
The location of new mobile telephone base stations
technology uses fixed transmission towers or base
needs to be carefully considered in relation to existing
stations to communicate ‘over the air’ with the NBN
base stations, to ensure that the network functions 3.4 Below ground
installed equipment within the home or business. Line
effectively. Mobile telephone antennas generally need to telecommunications infrastructure
of sight from the tower to the equipment at the home
be mounted clear of surrounding obstructions like trees
or business is essential. Western Australia is a vast state
and buildings to avoid loss of reception and to allow each For the purposes of this policy, below ground
with complex geography and fixed wireless technology
mobile telephone base station to cover its intended cell infrastructure refers to pit and pipe infrastructure used
enables access to NBN services in locations that are
with minimum transmitter power. They must also be sited to house fixed line (fibre, Hybrid Fibre Coaxial, copper) to
difficult or not cost effective to reach with fixed line
where they will not interfere with neighbouring cells. carry voice and data services.
technology.
The more base stations of a particular carrier there are
In accordance with the Fibre Deployment Amendment
in an area, the smaller the cells, which means the power
3.3.3 Amateur radio equipment 2011 to the Telecommunications Act, developers that are
and energy levels of each station are generally lower. In
corporations are required to provide fibre-ready pit and
areas of high mobile use there are many small cells to The amateur service is designed primarily to facilitate
pipe infrastructure to new developments that are within
meet traffic demands, maintaining service quality and hobby radio communications and for technical
the National Broadband Network Corporations’ (NBN Co)
capacity. Antennas do not need to be very high and can experimentation and operates on specified frequency
fibre footprint.
be installed on building roofs or small poles. If additional bands. Amateur radio operators communicate using
base stations are needed in areas where mobile network transmission modes including, but not limited to, Morse Developers of all new developments are encouraged
coverage already exists, demand may be met by adding code, telephony and data. to engage with a telecommunications carrier to ensure
that pit and pipe infrastructure complies with industry
specifications or any standards set by the ACMA.

STATE PLANNING POLICY 5.2 3
Telecommunications Infrastructure
3.5 Policy exemptions 3.7 Relationship of this policy This policy complements the Telecommunications Act
to Commonwealth legislation and other relevant and subordinate legislation.
Some telecommunications facilities are exempted from
development approval under the Telecommunications The Telecommunications Act provides the regulatory
Act. framework for the Australian telecommunications
industry. All telecommunications carriers and service
Schedule 3 of the Telecommunications Act and related
providers must comply with the Act and its subordinate
subordinate legislation provides telecommunications
legislation. The ACMA is empowered through the
carriers with powers to enter land to inspect land,
Telecommunications Act to regulate and monitor the
maintain facilities and install certain types of facilities
performance of the industry, and reports to the Minister
(known as low-impact facilities), and immunity from some
for Communications annually.
state and territory laws, including planning laws, when
carrying out these activities. Relevant amendments to the Telecommunications Act
include:
Schedule 3 of the Telecommunications Act includes:
• Telecommunications Legislation Amendment (Fibre
• low-impact facilities described in the
Deployment) Act 2011 - This amendment to the
Telecommunications (Low-Impact Facilities)
Telecommunications Act provides a framework for
Determination 1997 and all existing and future
the roll-out of the National Broadband Network,
amendments, when installed by a carrier;
specifically the deployment of optical fibre lines and
• a temporary defence facility; and
fibre-ready infrastructure.
• a facility authorised by a Facilities Installation Permit
Other relevant Commonwealth legislation and
issued under the Telecommunication Act.
subordinate codes include:
Carriers seeking to install low-impact facilities are required
• National Broadband Network Companies Act 2011 –
to comply with Schedule 3 of the Telecommunications
This Act provides a regulatory framework for NBN
Act and the Telecommunications Code of Practice 1997.
Corporations that promotes the long term interests of
end-users of carriage services or of services provided
3.6 When this policy should be applied
by means of carriage services; and
Due regard should be given to this policy by State and • Mobile Phone Base Station Deployment Industry Code
local government planning decision-makers for: (C564:2011) – This code applies a precautionary
approach to the deployment of mobile telephone
a) The preparation and assessment of local planning
infrastructure to ensure that the exposure of the
schemes and local planning policies;
community to EME is minimised. It also sets out a
b) The preparation of local structure plans; and consultation procedure for infrastructure development
c) Development proposals for telecommunications that does not require development approval (low
infrastructure. impact facilities).

STATE PLANNING POLICY 5.2 4
Telecommunications Infrastructure
4. POLICY OBJECTIVES 5. POLICY MEASURES d) display design features, including scale, materials,
external colours and finishes that are sympathetic
The objectives of this policy are to: 5.1 Visual impacts to the surrounding landscape;
a) facilitate the provision of telecommunications iii) In addition to the existing exemptions under
For telecommunications infrastructure to be effective,
infrastructure in an efficient and environmentally the Telecommunication Act, local governments
structures are generally located prominently, at high
responsible manner to meet community needs; should consider exempting telecommunications
points in the landscape or on top of buildings, where they
infrastructure from the requirement for development
b) manage the environmental, cultural heritage, are more likely to be visible to the public.
approval where:
visual and social impacts of telecommunications
The planning authority may exercise discretion in
infrastructure; a) The infrastructure has a maximum height of 30
addressing the visual impacts of telecommunications
c) ensure that telecommunications infrastructure is metres from finished ground level;
infrastructure. Visual impacts of an infrastructure
included in relevant planning processes as essential b) The proposal complies with the policy measures
development proposal should be assessed by applying
infrastructure for business, personal and emergency outlined in this policy; and
the following set of policy measures to guide the location,
reasons; and,
siting and design of the structure. c) The proponent has undertaken notification of
d) promote a consistent approach in the preparation, the proposal in a similar manner to ‘low impact
assessment and determination of planning decisions 5.1.1 The benefit of improved facilities’ as defined and set out in the Mobile
for telecommunications infrastructure. telecommunications services should Phone Base Station Deployment Industry Code
be balanced with the visual impact (C564:2011);
on the surrounding area.
iv) Telecommunications infrastructure should be located
i) Assessment of the visual impact of development where it will facilitate continuous network coverage
proposals for telecommunications infrastructure and/or improved telecommunications services to the
should be made on a case by case basis; community; and
ii) Telecommunications infrastructure should be sited
v) Telecommunications infrastructure should be co-
and designed to minimise visual impact and whenever
located and whenever possible:
possible:
a) Cables and lines should be located within an
a) be located where it will not be prominently visible
existing underground conduit or duct; and
from significant viewing locations such as scenic
B) Overhead lines and towers should be co-located
routes, lookouts and recreation sites;
with existing infrastructure and/or within existing
b) be located to avoid detracting from a significant
infrastructure corridors and/or mounted on
view of a heritage item or place, a landmark, a
existing or proposed buildings.
streetscape, vista or a panorama, whether viewed
Section 6.3.1 provides guidance on what applicants
from public or private land;
should submit in support of a development application to
c) not be located on sites where environmental,
assist planning assessment.
cultural heritage, social and visual landscape values
maybe compromised and

STATE PLANNING POLICY 5.2 5
Telecommunications Infrastructure
6. IMPLEMENTATION 6.2 Structure planning at the local level (C564:2011), excluding Sections 6 and 7 (which
only apply to developments that do not require
This policy is given effect by the Planning and a) In the preparation and assessment of structure plans development approval);
at the local level, consideration should be given to the
Development Act 2005. Telecommunications infrastructure b) a statement and/or a map indicating the extent to
need for telecommunications services in supporting
should be included as a relevant planning consideration which the proposed facility addresses the network
documentation. Early consideration of wireless
in the preparation and assessment of local planning capacity for future demand and/or current gaps in
and mobile phone telecommunication system
schemes and local planning policies, structure plans (at service;
requirements allows for them to be incorporated into
the local level) and development applications.
c) a statement about the extent to which the proposed
the design process and mitigate any potential visual
facility complies with any relevant local planning
impacts to the community.
6.1 Local planning schemes scheme or planning policy adopted under a scheme
and local planning policies and (if applicable) justification for any variation from
6.3 Development
the relevant scheme or policy provisions;
When preparing or reviewing local planning schemes or
In considering a development application, the local d) plans and coloured graphic illustrations, including
local planning policies, local governments should ensure
government should give consideration to: photo simulations, showing the type of facility and
that:
its relationship with adjacent development, including
a) The extent to which the proposal adheres to the
a) Telecommunications infrastructure is included in the the proposal’s elevations showing the extent, height
policy measures outlined in Section 5 of this policy
zoning table as a land use; and appearance, proposed materials and colour, any
b) The need for services to be located to optimise screening or fencing, and any external lighting;
b) Telecommunications infrastructure is not designated
coverage; and
as a ‘use not permitted’ (X) by the scheme in any zone e) details of any significant environmental constraints,
in the zoning table; c) Documentation to be submitted under Section 6.3.1 including those associated with the species, condition
of this Policy. and significance of any vegetation to be removed;
c) In zones where the location of telecommunications
infrastructure is supported, telecommunications The advertising period for a development proposal should f) map and a statement about where the proposed
infrastructure is designated as a permitted use (P) in be no more than 21 days. facility is to be located. If the facility is proposed within
the zoning table; an infrastructure easement or corridor, consultation
6.3.1 Information to be submitted when with other users is to be demonstrated; and
d) In zones where telecommunications infrastructure
lodging a development application
is permitted, the Scheme provides guidance on g) a statement explaining how the proposed facility
development approval exemptions; In addition to the requirements for development addresses the policy measures for the location, siting
e) Buffer zones and/or setback distances are not included applications under the relevant local planning scheme, and design of telecommunications infrastructure set
in local planning schemes or local planning policies; development applications for telecommunications out in Section 5.1.1 of this Policy.
and infrastructure are to include the following information:
a) Schemes and policies adhere to the policy measures a) a report demonstrating compliance with the Mobile
outlined in Section 5 of this policy. Phone Base Station Deployment Industry Code

STATE PLANNING POLICY 5.2 6
Telecommunications Infrastructure
7. DEFINITIONS National Broadband Network Corporation has the same
meaning given to the term in the National Broadband
Telecommunications Carrier has the same meaning given Companies Act 2011
to the term in the Telecommunications Act 1997.
Radiocommunications has the same meaning given to the
Fibre-ready Facility has the same meaning given to the term in the Radiocommunications Act 1992
term in the Telecommunications Act 1997.
Pit and pipe infrastructure refers to pits and conduits
Relevant health and safety standard means health and installed in subdivisions to house fixed line
safety standards specified for the installation and telecommunications cable.
operation of telecommunications facilities under the:
Fibre-ready facility has the same meaning given to the
• (Commonwealth) Telecommunications Code of Practice term in the Telecommunications Act 1997
1997;
Carriage services include services for carrying
• (Commonwealth) Radiocommunications Act 1992; communications, for example telephone services, Internet
• Mobile Phone Base Station Deployment Industry access services and Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
Code (C564:2011) (this is a document prepared by the services.
Communications Alliance and registered with the ACMA
as an Industry Code)
Telecommunications infrastructure means any part of the
infrastructure of a telecommunications network and
includes any line, equipment, apparatus, tower, antenna,
tunnel, duct, hole, pit, or other structure used, or for use,
in or in connection with a telecommunications network.
Service provider has the same meaning given to the term
in the Telecommunications Act 1997
National Broadband Network has the same meaning given
to the term in the National Broadband Companies
Act 2011