Local Planning
Policy 3.14
Wray Avenue Precinct
fremantle.wa.gov.au

Wray Avenue Precinct
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (the Regulations). This policy may be cited as
Local Planning Policy 3.14 – Wray Avenue Precinct (LPP 3.14).
Purpose
To provide design guidance to development within the Wray Avenue Precinct to ensure
new development is compatible with the character of the area and adjoining heritage
listed places.
Objectives
The objective of this policy is to:
• Ensure new development or redevelopment within the Wray Avenue Precinct is
compatible with the distinctive character and heritage significance of the Precinct.
Application of this Policy
The Wray Avenue Precinct comprises Wray Avenue from Hampton Road to South Terrace
and is located within Schedule 7, Local Planning Area 4 – South Fremantle, Sub Area
4.3.3, of LPS4. This policy applies only to the Wray Avenue Precinct as identified on the
plan below.
For heritage-protected places, in the event that there is a conflict between this Policy and
the Residential Design Codes of Western Australia (R-Codes) and Local Planning Policy 3.6
Heritage-protected Places Built Form and Land Use (LPP 3.6), the criteria in LPP 3.6 will
prevail.
Where development is proposed on a site or lot that is either a battleaxe lot, rear survey
strata lot or the equivalent, and the proposed development has minimal presentation to the
streetscape, only the height and street setback provisions of this Policy apply.
Variations to this Policy will be assessed against the Objectives of this Policy and consistency
with the streetscape character as set out in Appendix 1.
1/6

Policy provisions
PART 1 - MIXED USE OR NEIGHBOURHOOD CENTRE ZONES
Design Element Policy Provision
1. Form, Proportion, and Architectural Style
1.1 Design a) Development shall accord with the established
character and context of Wray Avenue as discussed in
Appendix 1 of this Policy, and have regard with its
compatibility with adjoining buildings.
b) New buildings at the west end of Wray Avenue should
relate sympathetically with existing buildings included
on the Heritage List under LPS4 in architectural style,
bulk and scale. Existing buildings characteristically
have a parapet on the front façade and the roof behind
is pitched or gabled, and similar design elements are
strongly encouraged in new development.
1.2 Maximum wall height 7m
2/6

1.3 Minimum external wall at 3.6 – 4.0 metres in order to achieve proportions similar to
west end of Wray Avenue existing heritage listed buildings.
1.4 Verandahs / Canopies New buildings are to have verandahs or canopies that
extend fully across the width of the building façade with a
minimum height of 2.75m above the footpath.
2. Side and street setbacks
2.1 Primary Street Setback Nil
2.2 Secondary Street Setback Nil
2.3 Side Setbacks Nil for the first 5 metres from façade, thereafter 1.5m
PART 2 – RESIDENTIAL ZONES
All Development
3. Clause 5.1.2 – Street setbacks
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
5.1.2 (C2.1 - C2.4)
Deemed-to-comply
C2.1 Buildings, excluding carports, set back from the primary street boundary:
i. 4 metres; and
ii. Minimum of 2 metres for porches, balconies, verandahs, or equivalent and may
extend across 100% of the façade.
C2.2 Buildings may have a nil setback from secondary streets.
C2.3 Does not apply.
C2.4 Does not apply.
4. Clause 5.1.3 – Lot boundary setbacks
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
5.1.3 (C3.2)
Deemed-to-comply
C3.2 Buildings shall have a zero setback from both side boundaries for a minimum building
depth of 5 metres from the façade; any remaining part of a building shall have a
minimum setback of 1.5 metres.
5. Clause 5.1.6 – Building Height
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
5.1.6 (C6) (C7 – NEW)
Deemed-to-comply
C6 Maximum of two storeys (7m).
3/6

C7 Excluding development on a rear survey strata lot, battleaxe lot or the equivalent, the
front and side elevations of buildings shall present generally as a single storey dwelling
when viewed from the street with the predominant bulk of any two-storey element
located at the rear of the dwelling.
6. Clause 5.2.1 – Setback of garages and carports
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
5.2.1 (C1.1, C1.2 & C1.4)
Deemed-to-comply
C1.1 Garages and carports set back in line with or behind the front wall of the dwelling.
C1.2 Does not apply.
C1.4 Does not apply.
7. Clause 5.2.2 – Garage and carport width
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
5.2.2 (C2)
Deemed-to-comply
C2 Garages and carports and their supporting structures facing the primary street are not to
occupy more than 3.2 metres of the frontage at the setback line as viewed from the
street where the garage or carport are setback in line with or less than 2 metres behind
the front wall of the dwelling. This may be increased up to 45 per cent of the width of the
front wall where the garage or carport is set back 2 metres or more behind the front wall
of the dwelling.
8. Clause 5.2.4 – Street walls and fences
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
5.2.4 (C4.1, C4.2)
Deemed-to-comply
C4.1 Front fences within the primary street setback area that are a maximum of 1.2 metres
high and visually permeable above 300mm as measured from the primary street side of
the fence.
C4.2 Does not apply.
9. Design Element Policy Provision
9.1 Roof Pitch Hipped or gabled with a minimum roof pitch 22.5 degrees
9.2 Roof form Roofs shall be simple in form, incorporating no more than two roof
elements facing the primary and / or secondary street.
9.3 Eaves Minimum width 450mm
4/6

Appendix 1 – Streetscape Context
Initial planning for the Wray Avenue Precinct took place approximately 30 – 40 years after
the more level areas of the Fremantle townsite had been surveyed. In this Precinct the
layout of the often irregularly shaped lots reflects the topography of the land – South
Terrace follows the line of transition between the level sandy ground along the ocean front
and the limestone ridge further inland. Wray Avenue’s oblique alignment provided a more
gradual incline than if it had run at right angles to South Terrace, facilitating construction
of the road without major earthworks and providing a suitable route for the tram along the
east end of Wray Avenue in the early 20th Century.
The basic character of the Precinct can be seen as evolving to the point where aspects
such as the pattern of development, urban grain, density of development and mix of uses,
together with the way that these are embodied in the building types, in their height,
massing and appearance, was effectively established by the early part of the 20th century
and remained largely unchanged until circa 1950s. It is important that new development
and redevelopment continues this process of evolution, taking the opportunity to
incorporate new styles and materials in ways that are sympathetic to the existing
character but showing innovation in responding to future needs.
The Wray Avenue Precinct can be categorised as a high-quality varied townscape defined
by a significant streetscape consisting of larger scaled mixed-use developments at each
end and lower scaled residential developments along its length.
The west end of Wray Avenue was an established mixed-use area by the early 20th
Century. On the north side many of the original buildings remain and have a high level of
cultural significance.
Typically, they display the characteristics of the Federation Classical Free Style with front
façades parapeted and influenced by Paladian proportions to provide a balanced façade
with neither horizontal nor vertical emphasis.
On the south side the mixed-use buildings were constructed after 1960 and generally are
not significant.
All retail/commercial buildings in this part of Wray Avenue have zero front and side
setbacks. Typically, the older buildings have verandahs that span the full width of the
footpath and are of the same height as the ground floor of the building. Retail units
present an interactive front to the street.
Away from the west end there is a lower density of development, mainly residential and
consisting of single storey, modestly scaled masonry houses, predominantly Victorian or
Federation in style and often semi-detached. The design and placement on the lot often
reflects the topography of the land, especially near Brennan Street. Further up Wray
Avenue, to deal with the lower level of land dwellings are set well back or have high
foundations.
5/6

The houses relate well to the street, most of them having verandahs that run the full
width of the front facade with the front edge varying up to 2 metres from the street
boundary. Front fences are generally low.
Roofs are typically hipped or gabled, pitched at 22.5 degrees and of corrugated iron or
clay tiles.
The overall character is remarkably consistent. The individuality of the houses is often
expressed in small decorative details, sometimes reflecting when they were built,
sometimes the fact that they were owned by Italians. There is no sense of striving to be
different, or of making a statement, but there is potential for new styles, which combine
traditional characteristics with innovative design to suit the contemporary environment.
In the residential section towards Hampton Road a few significant commercial buildings
remain on the north side. On the south-west corner the old Beaconsfield theatre faces
Hampton Road (please note the commercial centre in Hampton Road is not included in this
policy).
The neighbourhood centre in the Wray Avenue Precinct provides a range of important local
services and has significant social value. In particular, Galati’s store is a major attraction,
for people outside the area as well as local residents. Along the east side of South Terrace
commercial / retail uses prevail. There are no industries or warehouses in the Precinct.
Local Planning Policy – Document Control
Responsible Officer Previous Policy Title Next Review Date
Manager City Planning N/A (four years)
Version Decision to Adopt/Amend Brief Details of Modifications
1 6 June 2012 – Ordinary Council Adoption
Meeting - Item PSC1206-84
2 9 October 2024 – Ordinary Updated template and legislative references
Council Meeting - C2410-4
3
Public Consultation No
WAPC Approval Required? No Date approved by WAPC N/A
6/6