Department of Planning,
Lands and Heritage
Position
Statement:
Workforce accommodation
January 2018
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the Department © State of Western Australian website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, Published by the
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result Perth WA 6000 infoline: 1800 626 477
of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred Locked Bag 2506 This document is available in alternative
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before Perth WA 6001 formats on application to the
applying the information contained in this document to Published January 2018 Communications Branch.
particular circumstances.

Position Statement:
1
Workforce accommodation
January 2018
1. Purpose 2. Position statement 3. Background 4. Development
requirements
This Position Statement has been Where practicable, workforce The Planning and Development (Local
prepared by the Western Australian accommodation should be provided in Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 were
The development arrangements for
Planning Commission (WAPC) to established towns, in locations suitable gazetted in 2015. The Regulations define
workforce accommodation in Western
assist users of the planning system to its context, to facilitate their ongoing Workforce Accommodation as a:
Australia are covered by three key
in understanding the land use sustainability. Planning and development premise, which may include modular legislative instruments.
planning considerations for workforce of workforce accommodation should be or relocatable buildings, used –
accommodation. consistent with local planning strategies The Planning and Development Act 2005
(a) primarily for the accommodation
and schemes, except where the Mining establishes a general requirement for
The purpose of this Position Statement of workers engaged in
Act 1978 and State Agreement Acts all development to obtain approval
is to: construction, resource, agricultural
prevail. through a development application made
or other industries on a temporary
• outline the development under a planning scheme. However,
basis; and
requirements for workforce the jurisdictions of the Mining Act 1978
accommodation under the Planning (b) for any associated catering, and State Agreement Acts can vary
and Development Act 2005 and sporting and recreation facilities the application of the Planning and
associated regulation for the occupants and authorised Development Act 2005, and this needs to
visitors
• provide guidance to local be reflected in local planning instruments.
governments on the role of the local Workforce accommodation is common
The decisions of when, how and
planning framework in the planning throughout regional Western Australia,
where to accommodate workers are
and development of workforce and is particularly evident in the Pilbara
complex, and may be influenced by
accommodation. and Goldfields.
factors such as the global economy and
Commonwealth taxation arrangements.
Similarly, arrangements for workforce
accommodation may be made between
the State Government and companies
directly and through the issuing of
‘general purpose’ mining tenements.
These factors can impact the regional
development aspirations of local
communities, who seek other ways to
influence the arrangements governing
workforce accommodation, including
the land use planning system. The table
below summarises the parameters:

Position Statement:
2
Workforce accommodation
January 2018
5. Planning and Where the development of workforce
Under the Planning and Development Act 2005 planning decision-makers can:
accommodation is outside the
Development
Control Not control jurisdiction of the Mining Act or State
Act 2005
Agreement Acts, the requirement to
1. Where a planning application is 1. Any matters specified by a State
obtain development approval under the
required, the terms of an approval Agreement Act.
Section 15 of the Planning and Planning and Development Act applies.
related to: 2. The issuing of a mining tenement made
Development Act 2005 provides that the
(a) timeframe under the Mining Act 1978 – which can WAPC: “…may do all things necessary The Planning and Development Act
(b) setbacks include a general purpose lease for ‘any or convenient to be done for or in gives power to the WAPC and local
other purpose directly connected with governments to prepare a variety of
(c) landscaping connection with the performance
mining operations’ (may be located in a planning instruments that establish a
of its functions”.
(d) parking and access
townsite). regime of development control. The
(e) location and appearance of The functions of the WAPC are prescribed main planning instruments used to
3. That workforce accommodation
buildings in the Planning and Development Act, control development are region planning
needs to be met by permanent
(f) integration with surrounding areas accommodation rather than ‘camps’. and include the following: schemes and local planning schemes.
(g) any other land use planning matters 4. That workforce accommodation be • To advise the Minister on the Planning schemes have the status of
relevant to the site. located in a town rather than a mine- coordination and promotion of subsidiary legislation and therefore have
land use, transport planning and legislative effect.
(2) Where a planning application is site.
land development in the State in a
required, the ability to approve/refuse 5. Whether the land for workforce Where the requirement for development
sustainable manner. [s.14(a)(i)]
a proposal considering local planning accommodation is owned by the approval under the Planning and
scheme requirements. Crown or held in fee simple. • To prepare and keep under review Development Act applies, a local
planning policies. [s.14(b)(ii)] government has the ability to control
6. Requirements for ‘community
• To provide advice and assistance the location, permissibility, terms of
contributions’ by workforce
to anybody or person on land use operation and development standards
accommodation proponents.
planning and land development and of workforce accommodation through
7. Requirements for workforce
in particular to local governments in its local planning scheme and other
accommodation to achieve ‘legacy
relation to local planning schemes local planning instruments. Generally,
benefits’.
and their planning and development proposals for workforce accommodation
functions. [s.14(d)] for operational workforces that are
outside the jurisdiction of the Mining
Act or State Agreement Acts should be
located in a town and integrated with
town services, in so far as practicable.
These matters are discussed in further
detail in the following section.

Position Statement:
3
Workforce accommodation
January 2018
6. Local planning local planning strategy may provide with the intent of its local planning Schemes may include provisions that
direction on the circumstances in strategy. The zoning table should deal with development requirements
framework
which it is appropriate for workforce recognise the case-by-case nature of for workforce accommodation including
accommodation to be located in existing workforce accommodation proposals, and factors such as:
The local planning framework refers to
towns, and provide the background and incorporate flexibility within zoning table. (a) The suitability of the site to be
the planning instruments used by a local
rationale for this approach. developed for the proposed use
government to guide land use planning If workforce accommodation is associated
and establish a system of development Where a local government has not with a mining tenement, it is outside (b) The siting of the land use in the
control within its domain. These planning adopted a local planning strategy, of the jurisdiction of the Planning and context of surrounding existing and
instruments include the local planning consideration of the issues discussed Development Act, and therefore not proposed land uses
strategy, the local planning scheme and above may be considered on a case-by- subject to the local planning scheme. (c) Access and egress to the site by
local planning policies. The following case basis. Where a local government seeks to vehicles and pedestrians
sections set out an approach for local influence the form and location of (d) Facility design and use including
governments to guide the planning for 6.2 Local planning scheme workforce accommodation associated provision and/or access to recreation,
workforce accommodation. with a mining tenement the scheme may entertainment and community
A local planning scheme can be used in be of such a nature as to activate the services.
6.1 Local planning strategy consultation between the Ministers for
a variety of ways to provide direction on
Mining and Planning.
a range of matters, including: location, 6.3 Local planning policies
A local planning strategy sets out a local permissibility, development standards,
Permissibility in the ‘Use Class Table’
government’s objectives for the future and terms of operation. must be supported by provisions in Where scheme provisions are not
planning and development of its local
Part 5 of the Scheme. Inclusion of the required, local planning policies can
A scheme’s ‘Use Class Table’ table
government area, and includes a broad
following provision may trigger possible also provide guidance on workforce
guides the permissibility of workforce
strategic framework by which to pursue
consultation between the Ministers for accommodation and be consistent with
accommodation in zones of the scheme.
those objectives. Local planning strategies
Mining and Planning: this Position Statement. Local planning
If workforce accommodation is proposed
are required to apply WAPC policy.
policies are made pursuant to a scheme
to be located within a mining tenement, “In considering proposals for
and assist local governments in the
The local planning strategy could a local scheme cannot act to prohibit the workforce accommodation on mining
guidance of discretion. For example,
acknowledge that workforce land use. Where a State Agreement Act tenements, Council may exercise its
where the zoning table lists workforce
accommodation is economically critical limits the application of the Planning and discretion to inform the Minister for
accommodation as a ‘discretionary’ use in
infrastructure that may be required in Development Act, the scheme may not Mines and the Minister for Planning
a particular zone, a local planning policy
a very short timeframe, and therefore be relevant. in writing that the granting of a
can outline the circumstances where
flexibility will be required. mining lease or general purpose lease
If workforce accommodation is not is contrary to the provisions of the that use could be approved, with similar
The local planning strategy can be associated with a mining tenement or Scheme.” guidance as detailed in the local planning
used to identify preferred locations State Agreement Act, it is open to the strategy and schemes sections, above.
for future workforce accommodation local government to set permissibility in
developments. Additionally, the the zones of the scheme in accordance

Position Statement:
4
Workforce accommodation
January 2018
7. Further information
Enquiries concerning this statement
should be directed to:
Department of Planning, Lands
and Heritage
Gordon Stephenson House
140 William Street
PERTH WA 6000
Locked Bag 2506
PERTH WA 6001
Information relevant to this
Position Statement is published at:
www.dplh.wa.gov.au