Department of Planning,
Lands and Heritage
Position
Statement:
Residential accommodation
for ageing persons
March 2024
The Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage acknowledges the traditional owners and
custodians of this land. We pay our respect to Elders past and present, their descendants
who are with us today, and those who will follow in their footsteps.
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the Department © State of Western Australia website: www.wa.gov.au/dplh
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, Published by the
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result Perth WA 6000
of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect This document is available in alternative
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred Locked Bag 2506 formats on application to the
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before Perth WA 6001 Department of Planning, Lands and
applying the information contained in this document to Published 8 March 2024 Heritage Communications Branch.
particular circumstances.

Position Statement:
11
Residential accommodation for ageing persons
March 2024
1. Policy intent 2. Residential in part by an increased consumer desire
for choice and flexibility to ‘age in place’
accommodation for
This position statement outlines the and expectations in relation to lifestyle,
ageing persons in
Western Australian Planning Commission’s entertainment options and affordability.
(WAPC) requirements to support the Western Australia
The rate at which our population is ageing,
provision of residential accommodation for
coupled with more complex needs due to
ageing persons within Western Australia’s The Australian population is ageing at a
increased life expectancy and changing
local government planning framework. faster rate than ever before. The number
patterns of disease, will result in greater
of older Australians will more than double
It seeks to remove planning process demand for accommodation options
in the next 40 years. At a State level, WA
barriers and encourage the provision of that support a flexible transition from
Tomorrow (Population Report No. 11)
an appropriate supply and diversity of independent living to residential aged
forecasts an 86 per cent increase in people
options for residential accommodation care.
aged over 85 by 2031. The challenges
by establishing consistent, simplified and
arising from this trend are recognised as a Residential aged care facilities provide a
streamlined approval pathways, within
megatrend affecting global society. range of care options and accommodation
a strategically-led planning framework.
for older people who are unable to
It is proposed to complement existing An ageing population impacts all
continue living independently in their
government policies and services for older aspects of community life, including
own homes. The type of care provided
Western Australians. the economy, and options to address
ranges from personal care, to assisting with
these impacts are complex and multi-
activities of daily living, through to 24-hour
faceted. The implications of inadequate
nursing care.
planning to support the needs of our
ageing population are significant and The provision of personal and/or nursing
include, but are not limited to, increased care within residential aged care facilities
demand on both the Australian and State is what distinguishes this type of land
Governments’ infrastructure, housing use from other types of accommodation
and health care services and associated for older people, such as independent
funding, and increased costs to retrofit living complexes where residents live
existing developments to accommodate independently. Independent living
ageing persons’ needs. complexes are developments comprising
residential units or a number of separate
Residential Design Codes (R-Codes) Volume
complexes of residential units on common
1 provides density bonuses to encourage
land with access to communal facilities
greater provision of housing developed
that assist with ageing in place. They may
for aged or dependent persons. However,
be privately owned or owned by not-for-
these provisions alone are not expected to
profit organisations.
be able to meet the growing demand and
changing needs of older people, driven

Position Statement:
2
Residential accommodation for ageing persons
March 2024
The residential accommodation needs of 3. Application of this 4. Policy objectives 5. Policy measures
older people should be identified early in
position statement
the strategic planning process at the local This position statement seeks to achieve: 5.1 Strategic planning
level and appropriate incentives used to This position statement applies to the • consistent strategic planning considerations
encourage investment in the development
preparation and assessment of strategic consideration of residential
of quality residential accommodation Local planning strategies
and statutory planning proposals, accommodation needs for ageing
for ageing persons. This will facilitate
including local planning strategies, local persons in local planning strategies
All local planning strategies should
streamlined approvals processes and
planning schemes and amendments, • consistent statutory planning guidance consider, evaluate and provide for future
consistent decision-making.
structure plans and subdivision and to standardise land-use definitions and residential accommodation needs for
development applications, throughout zoning permissibility for residential ageing persons by incorporating a
Western Australia. accommodation for ageing persons in dedicated section within the strategy that
local planning schemes. details:
All other interrelated issues that impact • existing and projected demographic
on seniors’ housing, affordable housing, profiles (applying WAPC’s WA
retirement village reform and changes Tomorrow data and other appropriate
to the R-Codes, are outside the scope supplementary data)
of this position statement. This position • existing and projected demand
statement does not alter any provisions for aged persons’ housing and
relating to residential dwellings under the residential aged care needs across the
R-Codes. municipality
• medium to long-term aged persons’
housing and residential aged care
(beds) provision targets aligned to
projected future demand
• an analysis of the gaps in the existing
provision of aged persons’ housing
and residential aged care, and the
opportunities and constraints for the
delivery of different land use options, to
facilitate future provision of residential
accommodation for ageing persons
within the local government area.

Position Statement:
3
Residential accommodation for ageing persons
March 2024
The level of subsequent detail required accordance with the above, or it can be centre structure plans in accordance with Where applicable, local planning schemes
in a local planning strategy should demonstrated that opportunities for the the statutory planning requirements (see should contain the following land use
be commensurate with the extent of provision of residential accommodation section 5.2). definitions:
opportunities and constraints identified, for ageing persons are surplus to needs,
Residential aged care facility:
including consideration of: it may be appropriate to include the Interim or targeted strategic
a residential facility providing personal
• the identification of specific sites and/ detailed identification of specific sites or approaches and/or nursing care primarily to people
or locations where appropriate locations and any associated development It is preferable for a local government’s who are frail and aged or dependent
standards at the local planning scheme
• incentives intended to be outlined in position on residential accommodation for persons which, as well as accommodation,
and/or structure planning stage.
local planning schemes or other local ageing persons to be formalised within a includes:
government planning instruments Residential accommodation developments local planning strategy. Where a targeted a) appropriate staffing to meet the
(such as a Council-endorsed position) for ageing persons should be located approach is warranted, for example as an nursing and personal care needs of
to facilitate increased supply, where so that they are well integrated within interim measure, the local government residents
required, including: the community, serviced by adequate should formalise its position by preparing
b) meals and cleaning services
– development-based incentives transport networks and close to health, a report for Council endorsement. A local
c) furnishings, furniture and equipment.
such as density, height and plot community services and facilities that planning policy may be prepared to
ratio bonuses will service the everyday needs of guide the exercising of discretion, where This may consist of multiple components
future residents. Sites should be in a provided for in a local planning scheme.
– other mechanisms such as surplus that include communal amenities and
good walkable catchment with suitable
land sales/lease/joint venture facilities for residents and staff that are
surrounding infrastructure such as wide,
programs 5.2 Statutory planning incidental and ancillary to the provision of
shaded, well-lit pathways separated from
requirements such accommodation, residential respite
• consideration of acceptable
cyclists. Environmental and amenity
(short-term) care, and/or an independent
development standards, including
considerations and the provision of Local planning schemes living complex, but does not include a
built form outcomes, design criteria,
electricity, water, sewerage disposal and
hospital, rehabilitation or psychiatric
streetscape requirements, permissible telecommunication infrastructure should Local planning schemes should align with
facility.
height, density and development be adequately addressed. the local strategic planning framework to
setbacks intended to be outlined in facilitate the streamlined delivery of the Independent living complex:
local planning schemes or other local In line with a strategically-led, locally- identified residential accommodation a development with self-contained,
government planning instruments. tailored approach, the future needs for needs of ageing persons. As such, the independent dwellings for aged or
residential accommodation for ageing
scheme should specify locations, sites, dependent persons together with
It is a priority to consider the residential persons as identified in a local planning
densities and development standards for communal amenities and facilities for
accommodation needs of ageing strategy should translate into more
such accommodation, where appropriate. residents and staff that are incidental
persons and provide strategic planning detailed requirements, including potential
and ancillary to the provision of such
guidance at the earliest possible stage locations, sites, densities and development
accommodation, but does not include a
of the planning process. Where the standards in statutory planning
development which includes these features
strategic planning framework and/or local instruments, such as local planning
as a component of a residential aged care
planning strategy is yet to be updated in schemes, structure plans and activity
facility

Position Statement:
4
Residential accommodation for ageing persons
March 2024
Residential dwellings for aged or In industrial or similar zones where ancillary land-use changes over time to • relevant provisions of the local
dependent persons and accessible sensitive land use conflict exists, residential include the broader community, the local planning scheme, including any
dwellings, as defined under the R-Codes, aged care facilities and independent living government should determine if a change development standards developed
are not considered an ‘independent living complexes should be prohibited (‘X’) land of use application is required based on specifically for these land uses/sites
complex’ if the development contains a uses. In all other zones the permissibility the individual permissibility of the ancillary • the relevant provisions of the R-Codes
common driveway and/or gardens, but no of a ‘residential aged care facility’ and land use in the Zoning Table.
• the principles for good design under
other shared facilities. ‘independent living complex’ should be
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of the
considered at a strategic level by the local Structure plans
Note – the term ‘independent living Built Environment
government with consideration given
complex’ should not be considered a All future structure plans should • relevant provisions of other State
to locational elements such as proximity
retirement village as defined under the be consistent with the residential Planning Policies.
to relevant facilities and services and the
Retirement Village Act 1992 (WA) and vice accommodation needs of ageing persons
analysis of opportunities and constraints Where a proposed ‘residential aged care
versa. as identified in the local planning strategy
as required under section 5.1. In some facility’ or ‘independent living complex’
and/or local planning scheme. In the
Importantly, both of the above instances, it may be appropriate to allocate aligns with the above, development
absence of this guidance, the structure
definitions may constitute a residential a prohibited land-use permissibility approval should be supported.
plan should respond to the information
accommodation development for ageing for a ‘residential aged care facility’ and
requirements outlined in section 5.1. A local development plan should only
persons. It is the provision of care that ‘independent living complex’.
be prepared in circumstances where
distinguishes a ‘residential aged care
Incidental and ancillary amenities and Development applications for development standards do not yet exist,
facility’ from an ‘independent living
land uses associated with and supporting residential aged care facilities and or if the application for development
complex’.
residential aged care facilities and independent living complexes approval proposes to vary existing
Where applicable, the land uses ‘residential independent living complexes (for development standards or any of the
Residential aged care facilities and
aged care facility’ and ‘independent living example medical consulting room, above considerations.
independent living complexes are
complex’ should be classified as permitted pharmacy, café and the like) that are
encouraged within residential zones, A local development plan should ensure
(‘P’) land uses in residential zones and accessible for residents and staff only
mixed use and centre type zones, in the development is compatible and
mixed use/centre type zones in the (including visitors) should be considered
line with the local strategic planning integrated with streetscape(s) and existing
Zoning Table, unless sufficient justification and determined under the above new
framework (section 5.1). In accordance or future desired built form of the locality.
on proper and orderly planning and land-use definitions.
with clause 67 of the deemed provisions, Local development plans must outline
locational grounds is provided by the
Amenities and land uses associated the assessment of these developments built form requirements, including, but
local government to otherwise allocate
with and supporting residential aged should take the following into not limited to, building height, bulk and
a discretionary (‘D’ or ‘A’) land-use
care facilities and independent living consideration: scale, open space, setback, access, parking,
permissibility. A permitted land-use
permissibility is considered appropriate complexes that are accessible to both • any local planning strategy, local landscaping, servicing and drainage, visual
where the scheme is supported by residents and the general public should planning policy and/or Council privacy, solar access and other relevant
appropriate guidance and development be considered as separate land-use classes resolution/s specifically regarding the development requirements.
and determined in accordance with the
standards to manage the associated provision of residential aged care, as
land-use classification table under the
impacts, as required under section 5.1. provided for in this position statement
local planning scheme. If an incidental and

Position Statement:
5
Residential accommodation for ageing persons
March 2024
Development applications for proposals 6. Definitions Independent living complex
that include aged or dependent persons’ a development with self-contained,
dwellings and accessible dwellings Accessible dwelling independent dwellings for aged or
assessed under the R-Codes has the same meaning as in Residential dependent persons together with
Design Codes Volume 1. communal amenities and facilities for
Deemed-to-comply requirement Part D,
residents and staff that are incidental
C1.1.5 to C1.1.7 of the R-Codes – Volume Aged person
and ancillary to the provision of such
1 provides a density bonus for residential has the same meaning as in Residential
accommodation, but does not include
dwellings for aged or dependent persons Design Codes Volume 1.
a development which includes these
and accessible dwellings. If desired,
features as a component of a residential
this requirement may be applied to an Dependent person
aged care facility.
‘independent living complex’ proposal has the same meaning as in Residential
or the independent living complex Design Codes Volume 1.
component of a ‘residential aged care
Residential aged care facility
facility’ proposal. In these cases, the
a residential facility providing personal
calculation to determine the number of
and/or nursing care primarily to people
permissible dwellings should be limited to
who are frail and aged or dependent
the eligible portion(s) of the development
persons which, as well as accommodation,
only, consisting of self-contained,
includes:
independent aged or dependent persons
a) appropriate staffing to meet the
dwellings.
nursing and personal care needs of
In areas with a residential density of
residents
R80 and above, the residential dwelling
b) meals and cleaning services
components of a multi storey ‘independent
c) furnishings, furniture and equipment.
living complex’ or ‘residential aged care
facility’ proposal should be assessed under
This may consist of multiple components
the R-Codes Volume 2 – Apartments.
that include communal amenities and
All development proposals related to land uses for residents and staff that are
residential accommodation for ageing incidental and ancillary to the provision of
persons that fall outside the above new such accommodation, residential respite
land-use definitions should be considered (short-term) care and an independent
and determined under the R-Codes living complex, but does not include
and appropriate zoning and land-use a hospital, rehabilitation or psychiatric
classification table in the local planning facility.
scheme.