Design Review
This document outlines the operation of the City of Melville Design Review Group.
If you are searching for general information in relation to planning requirements, please refer to the
Planning Services page of our website https://www.melvillecity.com.au/ or alternatively you can
speak to one of our planning officers either on the phone 9364 0666 or in person at 10 Almondbury
Road, Booragoon during business hours, 8.30am – 5.00 pm Monday to Friday.
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP1.2
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 17 March 2026
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (Regulations) and the City of Melville Local Planning
Scheme No. 6 (LPS No. 6). This Local Planning Policy may be cited as Local Planning Policy No.
1.2 – Design Review (LPP 1.2).
Introduction
The purpose of this policy is to establish a clear and consistent framework for the operation of the
City of Melville Design Review Group. The policy seeks to ensure that design review is undertaken
in a transparent, accountable and timely manner, providing high-quality, independent and expert
advice on the design quality of development proposals.
Design review is a measure supporting the implementation of State Planning Policy 7.0 – Design of
the Built Environment (SPP 7.0). Design review is an evaluation process that raises the design
quality of development proposals and planning instruments which deal with built form. Design
review is conducted by a panel of trained, multi-disciplinary specialist and brings additional insight
to each proposal to ensure alignment with SPP 7.0. Design review benefits developers and design
teams in offering expert feedback and fresh perspectives in design development, which are
valuable for complex or unique proposals. It also benefits assessors and decision makers in
providing robust and independent professional insights on the design quality that aid in assessing
proposals and making balanced, informed decisions. Design review has been demonstrated to
enhance community spaces, and ensure major development leaves a positive legacy for the
community compared to proposals which have not gone through this process.
Policy Objectives
To ensure the administration of the City of Melville Design Review Group (DRG) is aligned with the
process outlined by the State Government Local Government Design Review Manual to set up and
operate design review processes.
To augment the provisions of the Local Design Review Guide where required.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 2/04/2026 1:04 PM Page 1 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Policy Scope and Application
The Design Review Group is to:
• Provide independent expert advice on certain development proposals and other planning
instruments against the 10 Design Principles within SPP 7.0
• Provide, through the Chairperson, independent, impartial, expert advice on design quality
which will be provided to proponents, decision-makers and the community in a formal written
report and recommendation against the 10 Design Principles of State Planning Policy 7.0 –
Design of the Built Environment.
• Adhere to the requirements of this Local Planning Policy, the associated Terms of Reference
and the City’s Code of Conduct.
This policy applies to the role and function of the City of Melville Design Review Group and the
Canning Bridge Design Review Group for sites within the City of Melville. The Design Review
Group is an advisory body only and not a decision maker. Design Review is not a development or
planning assessment, and the advice that comes from design review is not binding in the planning
process.
Definitions and Abbreviations
Chair
The design review panel member appointed as Chair. They will usually be the Session Chair for a
project review unless they are unavailable or have a conflict of interest.
Deputy Chair
One to two design review panel members appointed as Deputy Chairs. They can be the Session
Chair for a project review depending on availability, conflicts and expertise.
Design Advice
Professional advice provided by an appropriately qualified individual typically relating to a specific
design element of a proposal.
Design Review
A process of review conducted by a multi-disciplinary panel of qualified professionals established
by a regulatory authority and typically addresses an entire proposal rather than specific elements.
DRG
Design Review Group
Design Review Group Pool
A discrete selection of panel members identified to provide design review services the City’s
Design Review Group.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 2/04/2026 1:04 PM Page 2 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Minutes
Administrative minutes capture details of the design review session including attendance,
apologies, meeting time and duration. Design Review Report: A record of the Panel’s critique and
advice against the SPP 7.0 Ten Design Principles. It is not a verbatim record of the design review
session.
Session Chair
A Chair or Deputy Chair who will chair a design review session for a specific project. The Session
Chair should remain the same for all reviews of a project unless completely unavoidable.
SPP 7.0
State Planning Policy 7.0 – Design of the Built Environment
Terms of Reference
An associated document outlining the administration and operational requirements of the City’s
Design Review Group.
Policy Requirements
1 Status of the Design Review Group:
1.1 Design Review Group (DRP) members either collectively or individually are not authorised
to speak on behalf of the City or provide comment to the media in respect of any item under
consideration.
2 Membership:
2.1 The DRG will comprise a maximum of ten members including:
• Six essential members in Architecture, Landscape architecture and Urban design
• One heritage architecture specialist (ideally with aboriginal cultural heritage expertise
as well);
• One sustainability / environmental specialist (including environmental design, systems
ecology, urban water expertise); and
• One community representative (with preference for this representative to have design
or specialist expertise).
Additional specialist members may be considered in the following fields:
• Accessibility and universal design;
• Transport planning;
• Public art; and
• Civil, structure and services engineering.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 2/04/2026 1:04 PM Page 3 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

2.2 Of the above, there will be preference for positions to be made up of local residents to
ensure appropriate community representation and consideration, with at least one member
of each panel to be a resident. Each meeting is required to have at least one member as a
local resident. Appointed by Council to fulfill the requirements outlined in this Policy and the
City’s Terms of Reference. The term of appointment of a Panel Member will be for a
maximum of two years. Temporary extension of the term may be approved by the Chief
Executive Officer.
2.3 The Chief Executive Officer may terminate the appointment of a Panel member prior to
expiry of their term if it is considered that the member is not providing a positive contribution
to the intended function of the Panel or if the member has not demonstrated a satisfactory
level of attendance at Panel meetings.
2.4 Where a project requires specific design expertise which is not available on the nominated
panel or where conflicts of interest prevent the City from achieving a quorum of panel
members in respect of a specific matter, the City reserves the right to appoint a member
from the State Design Review Panel for the duration of that project.
2.5 In appointing the Panel, the City will seek to ensure one of the professional members is a
City of Melville resident or ratepayer to provide local input into designs.
2.6 In the event that a pool member resigns their membership, has their appointment
terminated, or is unable to continue to serve due to other unforeseen circumstances prior to
the expiry of their term of office, the City of Melville may appoint a replacement pool
member with equivalent qualifications and expertise to serve for the remainder of the
original member’s term of appointment.
3 Referral Requirements:
3.1 Development applications for Complex Development as defined by Local Planning Policy
1.1 Planning Process and Decision Making will be referred to the DRG.
3.2 Non-major development may be referred to the DRG for review at the discretion of the City
such as:
• Multiple and grouped dwelling developments comprising 10 or more units/tenancies
(dwellings and/or commercial).
• Development that is three or more storeys in height.
• Development of a property on the State Register of Heritage Places or a Local
Government Heritage List established under the Local Planning Scheme unless the
proposal is for Single House Development or other minor additions.
• Substantial development within centre zones.
• Major works undertaken by the local government.
3.3 Structure plans, activity centre plans, planning strategies, local planning policies, local
development plans, precinct plans, design guidelines or amendments to the City’s Local
Planning Scheme No. 6 or any other matter relating to design of buildings and places may
be referred to the DRP.
3.4 The below development types are excluded from design review group consideration:
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 2/04/2026 1:04 PM Page 4 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

• Single houses
• Two to nine unit grouped dwellings
• Child care centres within the residential zone
• Warehouses
• Industrial buildings
• Public works undertaken by a public authority other than the local government
• Projects eligible for referral to the State Design Review Panel or any other design
review panel.
4 Operations
4.1 DRG meetings will generally follow the meeting procedures, roles and responsibilities
outlined in the City’s Design Review Group Terms of Reference unless otherwise modified
in this policy.
4.2 A DRG meeting cannot proceed unless a quorum comprising a minimum of three panel
members is in attendance.
4.3 Notes of the DRG meeting should be maintained and reported in accordance with the City’s
Design Review Group Terms of Reference.
4.4 The DRG will examine design elements of development applications and other planning
proposals having regard to the statutory environment of the particular proposal. The DRG
will ensure the proposed design meet the City’s published policies including the provisions
of the City’s Local Planning Scheme No. 6, the Residential Design Codes Volume 1 and 2
and relevant Local and State Planning Policies. The DRG will also place an appropriate
emphasis on the need for proposed designs to be environmentally sustainable.
4.5 The number of reviews required will depend on the complexity of the proposal and the
quality of the initial design/proposal. However, two to three design review sessions are
generally recommended.
4.6 The first design review should occur during concept design stage, enabling proponents to
benefit from advice while the design is still flexible enough to accommodate changes.
Subsequent review scheduling will be based on the time required to respond to feedback.
The final review will usually be undertaken after lodgement of the application and informs
the statutory assessment and decision-making processes.
4.7 For amendments and minor changes following initial reviews and lodgement of a
development application, the DRG chair may provide design advice in lieu of a full design
review group meeting.
5 Code of Conduct:
5.1 Each member of the DRG is required to observe the City of Melville Code of Conduct.
6 Conflict of Interest
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 2/04/2026 1:04 PM Page 5 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

6.1 Where a member of the DRG has a financial interest (as defined by the Local Government
Act 1995) in a matter to be considered by the DRG, the member must disclose the interest
to the convenor of the meeting (in writing) and must not participate in or be present during
any discussion on the matter.
6.2 Where a member of the DRG has an impartiality interest in a matter to be considered by
the DRG (an interest that could, or could reasonably be perceived to adversely affect the
impartiality of the person having the interest arising from kinship, friendship or membership
of an association), the member must disclose the nature of the interest to the convenor of
the meeting, prior to any discussion on the matter. This extends to recent professional
associations (i.e. engaged by the developer for other past projects).
6.3 As there are also DRG members who may have proximity interest if they are also residents
within the City of Melville – this should also be disclosed to the City prior to any discussion
on the matter.
7 Confidentiality
7.1 Proceedings of a meeting of the DRG and details of any proposal before the DRG are to
remain confidential unless such details are disclosed in an authorised manner by a City
officer to the applicable applicant or presented in a recommendation report which is
available to the public.
8 Financial
8.1 As per the City’s Terms of reference, a sitting fee is payable to each member of the DRG
for attendance at the meeting. The sitting fee will be reviewed annually.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 2/04/2026 1:04 PM Page 6 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No. 6
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of the Built Environment
Residential Design Codes Volume 1
Residential Design Codes
Volume 2 – Apartments
Local Government Design Review Manual
Delegated Authority No: DA-020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Development and Neighbourhood Amenity Committee 11/03/03 P03/1001
Reviews
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/09/2011 P11/3246
Ordinary Meeting of Council 15/04/2014 P14/3485
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/09/2016 P16/3718
Ordinary Meeting of Council 17/09/2019 P19/3809
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/06/2023 UP23/13
Ordinary Meeting of Council 17/03/2026 UP26/102
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 2/04/2026 1:04 PM Page 7 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.