CITY OF FREMANTLE
LOCAL PLANNING POLICY 3.20
SPECIAL CONTROL AREA PROVISIONS FOR SMALL INFILL DEVELOPMENT
ADOPTION DATE: 28 MARCH 2018
AMENDED DATE: 27 FEBRUARY 2019
AUTHORITY: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT (LOCAL PLANNING
SCHEMES) REGULATIONS 2015 & LOCAL PLANNING
SCHEME NO. 4
PURPOSE
The purpose of this policy is to complement the planning controls set out in Local Planning
Scheme No. 4 (LPS4) Clause 5.7 - Special control area provisions for small infill
development. The purpose of these controls is to allow for an alternative development type,
in select areas, that provides for smaller dwelling options to what would normally be
available under the conventional zoning and density (R-Code).
APPLICATION
This policy applies to areas designated on the scheme map of LPS4 as Special Control
Area 5.7 (SCA 5.7). These areas are also indicated in Part 1 (Location) of this policy.
The policy is set out in the themes derived from the community engagement on the ‘Freo
Alternative’ (refer to Figure 1). The Freo Alternative was a community engagement process
that ran in late 2016, exploring the idea of smaller housing in Fremantle with the
community. Each theme derived from the Freo Alternative has an objective which needs to
be met. The deemed-to-comply criteria are one way to achieve the objective. The design
principles are an alternative way of meeting the theme’s objective. For some themes
additional guidance is provided. Note: not all themes have deemed-to-comply, design
principles or design guidance.
Policy Key
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY – The requirement to meet the objective
DESIGN PRINCIPLES – An alternative way to meet the objective
DESIGN GUIDANCE – Guidance on how to meet the deemed-to-comply requirement
STATUTORY BACKGROUND
Clause 5.7 in LPS4 sets out the requirements for development under this policy.
Where not provided for in this policy all definitions are as per LPS4 or the Residential
Design Codes of WA (R-Codes).
There are other planning provisions that apply to development within Special Control Area
5.7, which should be recognised and understood as part of the application process. Other
applicable planning documents will include:
 Part 5 of the R-Codes, with the exception of the following:
1

 Part 5.1.1 – Site area;
 Part 5.1.3 – Lot boundary setback (rear setback calculation only);
 Part 5.1.4 – Open space;
 Part 5.1.5 – Communal open space;
 Part 5.2.1 – Setback of garages and carports (specific provisions only);
 Part 5.3.1 – Outdoor living areas;
 Part 5.3.3 – Parking (specific provisions only); and
 Part 5.3.5 – Vehicular access (specific provisions only).
 Local Planning Scheme No.4.
 Other local Planning policies relating to development control; such as LPP 2.4:
Boundary Walls in Residential Development, LPP 2.8: Fences Policy and LPP 2.9:
Residential Streetscape Policy.
Figure 1: Eight themes as derived from the community during the engagement on the
Freo Alternative.
2

1. LOCATION
Objective: Promote smaller housing types in areas with access to public transport
and local amenities.
A key objective of the policy is to provide for a diversity of smaller housing sizes in
Fremantle’s suburban areas located near public transport, commercial areas, public parks
and amenities.
Figure 2: Areas designated on the LPS4 map as ‘SCA 5.7’, where this policy applies.
As per the requirements of clause 5.7 of LPS4, development of housing under this policy
can be considered on properties in areas identified on the scheme map as SCA 5.7, and
where the site is 600m2 or over.
The development would additionally need to meet all the requirements of the Local
Planning Scheme No. 4 and this local planning policy.
2. HOUSING CHOICE
Objective: Provide diversity of housing size and type in suburban areas to increase
housing choice.
Household sizes have reduced in the City of Fremantle in recent times, while new housing
being built is the largest yet. The purpose of this policy is to give smaller households an
alternative option in areas losing diversity of housing size.
3

As per the requirements of the clause 5.7 of LPS4 the following applies to development
under this policy:
 Any new dwelling shall have a maximum floor area of 120m2.
 A maximum of three dwellings, including existing dwellings, on lots 750m2 or less. On
lots over 750m2 an additional dwelling for every 150m2 in excess of 750m2.
These requirements are provided in the City’s Local Planning Scheme No. 4 provisions.
There are no variation criteria applicable to these requirements.
3. BUILT FORM
Objective: Ensure good quality design outcomes including design that is responsive
to local character and context.
3.1 Visual appearance
The design of a development contributes greatly to the visual interest of the building and
the character of a local area. A building’s aesthetics and articulation not only adds to the
composition and detailing of a building’s facade but also the appearance of the building and
perceived bulk and scale.
To satisfy the visual appearance requirement of this policy guidance will be taken from the
City of Fremantle’s Design Advisory Committee (DAC) on the visual appearance of the
place. Proponents are highly encouraged to seek preliminary feedback from the DAC prior
to submission of a formal development application.
3.2 Rear setback
Setbacks are the spaces between buildings and lot boundaries. Setbacks are important to
the amenity of new development and buildings on adjacent sites.
In established suburbs the rear setback, compared to a side setback, is more important as
traditionally large backyards adjoin each other and the setback between the rear adjoining
boundaries has, in the past, been substantial. The rear setback area is also generally
where the mature vegetation on a site is located. The purpose of the rear setback
requirement is therefore to maintain this separation, retain the existing pattern and mature
trees.
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
All buildings shall be set back a minimum 5.0m from the rear boundary of the development
site.
DESIGN PRINCIPLES
Council may consider a reduction to the 5.0m rear setback requirement where:
 The adjoining property to the rear has:
 A building with a wall 5.0m or more in length located within 2m of the common
boundary; or
 An existing ground level 1.0m or more higher than the subject site at the rear
boundary.
 Greater protection of existing mature trees could be attained than would otherwise be
achieved with the 5.0m setback requirement.
4

 Outdoor living areas and/or some of the Deep Planting Zone would be more suitably
located centrally on the site so as to gain better use of the northern aspect for
development.
 The property’s rear boundary does not adjoin a privately owned residential lot e.g. the
rear boundary abuts a laneway, right or way or other pedestrian or vehicular access
way.
3.3 Private outdoor living
Private outdoor living spaces are outdoor living areas, including balconies, courtyards and
terraces for private use. These spaces enhance the amenity and indoor/outdoor lifestyle of
residents and support indoor-outdoor living.
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
 A minimum 30m2 of outdoor living area shall be provided per dwelling, with minimum
length and width dimension of 4.0m, directly accessible from a habitable room. 20m2
of this area is to be without a permanent roof cover.
 The outdoor living area (balcony) may be reduced to a minimum 15m2 where the
outdoor living area is to an upper floor dwelling only.
 Outdoor living areas and balconies shall predominantly face north, east or west.
4. SUSTAINABILITY
Objective: Mandate higher than standard sustainability requirement in building
design & construction.
Buildings designed and constructed to sustainably deliver greater environmental, social and
economic outcomes.
4.1 Sustainable design
Sustainable buildings utilise passive environmental design that responds to local climate
and site conditions to provide optimal orientation, shading, thermal performance and natural
ventilation. Sustainable design additionally reduces reliance on heating and cooling
technology and minimises energy use, resource consumption and operating costs over the
life of the building. Other sustainable design measures include the use of sustainable
construction materials, recycling, material re-use, energy & water efficient features,
harnessing of renewable energy sources and appropriate water management.
 A sustainability report is to accompany the development assessment application. The
report is to outline the sustainability commitments of the development proposal and
demonstrate:
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
1. The development achieves a star rating of one star in excess of the current energy
efficiency requirement of the National Construction Code. The star rating shall be
certified by an accredited energy assessor.
2. The development includes at least two of the following:
5

 The provision of a minimum 1.5kw photovoltaic solar panel system per
dwelling.
 The provision of holding at least 1000 litres of rainwater per dwelling. The
rainwater is to be connected to water use in a dwelling(s), e.g. toilet or
washing machine, and/or used for irrigation on private or communal outdoor
areas, preferably the deep planting zone(s) on the development site.
 Approved grey water system for all dwellings.
 At least one dwelling is fully accessible suitable for independent living
(Platinum standard – Livable Housing Australia).
DESIGN PRINCIPLES
In cases where the deemed-to-comply requirements of Part 2 cannot reasonably be met,
Council may consider the achievement of an additional half (0.5) star as an alternative
means of complying with this policy.
Alternative options to those provided in Part 2 proposed as an option to meet the Part 2
requirements will be considered by Council on a case-by-case basis and against the
objective of the theme.
Alternative building methods that cannot meet the requirements above will be considered
on their own merits and deemed acceptable where they demonstrate significantly higher
sustainability outcomes through the submitted sustainability report.
5. OPEN SPACE
Objective: Maintain the traditional open feel of private lots in suburban areas, whilst
also allowing for viable development of smaller housing typologies.
Open space is generally the area of the lot not occupied by building(s). This includes areas
under eaves, usable flat roof areas, uncovered driveways and car parking and also patios
and verandahs where open on at least two sides. Traditionally, suburban lots had a high
open space percentage (approximately 70%).
5.1 Open space
Designing new development with a larger open space requirement (as defined by the R-
Codes) maintains the traditional feel of suburban areas and increases the amenity for
residents of the development.
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
 A minimum 70% of the entire development site shall be open space.
DESIGN PRINCIPLES
Council may consider a reduction in open space to a minimum of 60% open space where -
 an existing dwelling is retained or adapted with no significant enlargement or other
alteration to the existing building footprint; or
 a building assessed as having ‘some’ or more cultural heritage significance is
retained; or
6

 a building with a high degree of embedded energy is retained; or
 a minimum of 50% of the available open space includes areas that are developed as
water permeable uncovered:
 outdoor living areas,
 communal areas and/or
 deep planting zones.
6. TREES AND LANDSCAPING
Objective: Provide for existing and new trees on development sites, proportionate to
achieving viable development of smaller housing typologies.
Established tree and garden areas (landscaping) play an important role in integrating new
buildings into their surrounding streetscape and the existing neighbourhood context. There
are also many positive environmental benefits of trees and gardens including urban cooling
through shade, clean air from ecological processes, habitat for wildlife, aesthetic appeal to
the urban landscape and rain and storm water benefits.
6.1 Canopy cover
Trees contribute to the local environment, while creating a varied, interesting and attractive
landscape that builds on sense and character of place. Existing trees on private land
represent a significant proportion of tree canopy within our urban areas. Significant loss of
urban tree canopy, due to private development, is an increasing focus of community
concern. Retaining existing trees or planting new trees is critical for urban ecology and
maintaining a liveable environment.
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Retain or plant at least one tree on site that meets the following requirements -
 Healthy specimen with ongoing viability as identified by a suitably qualified arborist.
 At least 3m in height and/or have a trunk with a diameter of at least 100mm, one
metre from the ground and/or has a canopy of 3.0m or more or the potential to reach
these measurements.
 Specimen from the list of preferred tree/plant species in Appendix 1 of this policy.
DESIGN GUIDANCE
 Prior to lodging a development application, obtain an arboricultural report on health
and structural condition of existing trees. Healthy existing trees should be retained
where possible. If trees are identified for retention seek specialist arboricultural advice
on ‘rootable soil area’, management during construction and post construction
monitoring to ensure the health of trees.
 A condition of planning approval for the retained or planted tree to be maintained and
not removed will be included on all developments assessed under this planning policy.
6.2 Deep planting zone
Deep planting zones support healthy plant and tree growth and green spaces. Mandating a
deep planting zone ensures the loss of vegetation to make way for new development is
7

reduced and a sufficient uncovered and unpaved open space area is set aside and
protected from further development.
The mandatory requirement for a deep planting zone from LPS4 is as follows:
 A minimum 25% of the development site area shall be provided as deep planting zone.
 The deep planting zone can be included as part of the open space percentage for the
development, and 50% of the deep planting zone must be provided on the rear
proportion of the site.
 A minimum of 1 tree, to Council specification, is required to be retained or planted in the
deep planting zone on site.
Deep planting zone means an area of the lot for the exclusive use of supporting plant life.
The deep planting zone shall:
 Be landscaped, water permeable, unpaved and uncovered
 Be a minimum length and width dimension of 3.0 metres
 Not be used for vehicle parking or access
 Contain no buildings, patios, pergolas, swimming pools or external fixtures.
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
 The deep planting zone shall be reticulated and landscaped with waterwise plants.
 A waterwise landscaping plan shall be included with the development application.
 50% of the deep planting zone must be provided on the rear portion of the site.
DESIGN PRINCIPLES
Council may consider a reduction to the requirement for 50% of the deep planting zone to
be provided on the rear portion of the site where:
 The development site has an irregular lot shape which restricts placement of the deep
planting zone to the rear; or
 An alternative location of the deep planting zone would ensure areas of established
trees and shrubs are retained.
DESIGN GUIDANCE
 A waterwise landscaping plan shall be included with the development application.
 Deep planting zones are to be considered early in site planning, especially where
existing trees are identified for retention.
 The deep planting zone can be included as part of the open space for the
development.
 A condition of planning approval for the deep planting zone to be retained as a deep
planting zone (as per the definition) will be applied to all approved development
applications.
8

7. COMMUNITY
Objective: Promote private land development outcomes that would help foster social
interactions between new smaller dwellings, adjoining development & the street.
The interaction of a private development internally and externally between residents and
the existing neighbourhood and street is important to improve safety and enhances social
interactions of residents and the wider community.
7.1 Communal space
Communal spaces provide opportunities for casual social interaction among residents and
can assist with social integration. Communal space also contributes to the appeal of a
development and the wellbeing of residents.
The size, location and design of communal space will vary depending on the site context
and the scale of development. In designing these spaces, an emphasis should be placed
on their quality and potential to deliver benefit to residents and visitors.
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Where three or more dwellings are proposed, usable and effective communal space shall
be provided that is accessible to all residents of a development site, with a minimum
dimension of 3.0m.
DESIGN GUIDANCE
 Design solutions for communal space that is usable and effective may include seating
at building entries, near letter boxes and adjacent to streets or shared gardens,
outbuildings, laundries etc.
 Communal space should be consolidated into a well-designed, easily identified and
usable area.
 Communal space can be internal or external space and may be co-located with deep
soil areas or can be provided as a landscaped roof top terrace or a common room.
 Communal space in larger developments should consider greater dimensions.
7.2 Development fronting the street
The street interface is the transition area between the dwelling, its private or communal
space at the street edge and public domain. The interface of the development contributes to
the quality and character of the street and improves safety and enhances social
interactions.
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
 Direct access from the street to front of at least one dwelling, and may include an
existing retained dwelling.
 Major openings to habitable room windows and porches overlooking the street in at
least one dwelling within a development, this may be provided for within an existing
retained dwelling.
 The development should positively address adjoining public parks, open space or
bushland where applicable.
DESIGN PRINCIPLES
Council may consider a variation to the deemed-to-comply requirement where-
9

The interface of the development contributes to the quality and character of the street and
improves safety and enhances social interactions.
8. VEHICLE MOVEMENT AND PARKING
Objective: Appropriate allocation of land required for car parking & movement for
smaller house development.
Design, location and integration of parking garages/carports and driveways are essential
for:
• The efficient use of land on a development site;
• Tree retention;
• The amenity of the streetscape;
• Limiting the impact on ecological factors such as water permeability; and
• Safety of residents and pedestrians.
8.1 Vehicle access and movement
Vehicle access points are important connections between the street and the site, however
can have negative impacts on the streetscape and pedestrians. Additionally, the land
required for driveways and movement circles on a development site increases the
impermeable surface of the site. Vehicle access should be designed to maximise safety
and reduce impermeable surfaces.
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
The deemed-to-comply criteria of the R-Codes [5.3.5 Vehicle access] is amended as
follows:
 Driveways shall be water permeable in construction; no hardstand or impermeable
paved driveways will be approved on site.
 The minimum width of a driveway shall be 2.75m.
 The maximum width of a driveway shall be 3.0m.
 If the existing driveway/crossover doesn’t allow access to the rear of the site, then an
additional crossover is permitted subject to a 3.0m maximum width and in aggregate
width of crossovers on a development site to not be over 6.0m.
 Reduced or no turning circles can be considered where it is demonstrated clear sight
lines are provided at pedestrian and vehicle access points for pedestrian and cycle
safety, and vehicles can safety enter and exit the site and street. This does not apply
where the site abuts a primary distributor road or distributor A road.
DESIGN PRINCIPLES
Council may consider a variation to the deemed-to-comply requirement for a water
permeable driveway and the 2.75m minimum and 3.0m maximum driveway width where the
driveway is existing and has been proven to be existing on the site for at least two years.
8.2 Vehicle parking
In order to provide a diverse and attractive streetscape the space required for cars needs to
be carefully considered.
The mandatory requirement for a vehicle parking from LPS4 is as follows:
10

 A maximum of 1 vehicle parking bay shall be provided for each new dwelling and a
maximum of two car bays for any existing dwelling on the development site.
 The vehicle parking bay requirement above, can be waived where one small dwelling
within a development achieves a floor area of 60m2 or less.
 Visitor parking shall not be provided for development less than 5 dwellings.
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
 A maximum of two car bays shall be provided to the front of the development.
 The existing dwelling parking space can be used for rear development(s).
 Parking surfaces shall be water permeable in construction; no hardstand or
impermeable paved vehicle parking will be approved on site.
 No double garages will be permitted fronting the street (unless existing).
 Carport requirements as per Local Planning Policy 2.9 – Residential Streetscape
Policy
DESIGN GUIDANCE
 Car share facilities are strongly encouraged.
 Council will not provide on street resident parking permits for development under this
policy.
11