Canning Bridge Activity Centre Plan – Community
Benefit for Ceding of Road Widening Land
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP1.19
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 18 February 2020
Policy Objectives
The objective of this policy is:
 To provide additional clarification in the circumstances where recognition of a community
benefit may be sought for the ceding of road widening land within the Canning Bridge Activity
Centre Plan.
Policy Scope
This policy applies to land within the City of Melville contained within the Canning Bridge Activity
Centre Plan area.
Definitions / Abbreviations Used In Policy
Nil
Policy Statement
Element 22.1.10 of the Canning Bridge Activity Centre Plan outlines the circumstances where land
ceded by an applicant for road widening purposes may be eligible for consideration as a
community benefit for the purpose of assessment of bonus height. Element 22.1.10 indicates that
road widening land may be included as a community benefit where it is adjacent to Canning
Highway and where an applicant proposes to cede the land free of charge to the State of Western
Australia.
This Local Planning Policy clarifies the interpretation and application of Element 22.1.10 with
regard to proximity to Canning Highway. Specifically this Policy clarifies that Element 22.1.10 of
the Canning Bridge Activity Centre Plan shall apply only to land located adjoining Canning
Highway.
Note:
An amendment to the Canning Bridge Activity Centre Plan has been initiated to reiterate the above
interpretation of the Plan. This Local Planning Policy shall be read in conjunction with the
proposed amendment to the Canning Bridge Activity Centre Plan.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 25/02/2020 2:26 PM Page 1 of 2
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No.6
Canning Bridge Activity Centre Plan
Delegated Authority No: DA – 020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Ordinary Council Meeting 18 February 2020 P20/3836
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 25/02/2020 2:26 PM Page 2 of 2
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.