Position
Statement:
2
Housing on lots less than 100m
March 2024
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the Department © State of Western Australian website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, Published by the
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result Perth WA 6000
of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect This document is available in alternative
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred Locked Bag 2506 formats on application to the
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before Perth WA 6001 Communications Branch.
applying the information contained in this document to Published 8 March 2024
particular circumstances.

Position Statement:
11
Housing on lots less than 100m2
March 2024
1. Purpose 2. Background 3. Single houses and
grouped dwellings
This document, in conjunction with the House and land products on lots less than
on lots less than
R-Codes Volume 1, provides interim 100m2 have been selectively developed in
locational guidance for subdivision and both new (greenfield) and existing (infill) 100m2
house design on lots less than 100m2, residential areas. This is seen as a way to
to ensure consistent application and meet different housing needs, to assist Housing on lots less than 100m2 must
implementation throughout Western in providing for housing affordability, not be the predominant housing
Australia. create dwelling diversity and facilitate type in a street, and needs to be well
‘downsizing’ opportunities. integrated with the streetscape and
The Liveable Neighbourhoods review
surrounding development. Its location
(future Neighbourhood Design State A working group of key government,
and development need to be undertaken
Planning Policy), will address broader development and building industry
as part of comprehensive planning
application of this development type, stakeholders developed criteria and
carried out for new urban areas and
particularly within existing residential areas, standards for consideration and adoption
redevelopment of existing urban areas
activity centres and transit precincts. by the Western Australian Planning
through standard structure plans, precinct
Commission (WAPC). These standards
structure plans and scheme amendments.
were reviewed as part of modifications to
the R-Codes Volume 1, gazetted 10 April In considering any standard structure
2024. plans, precinct structure plans or scheme
amendments that include lots less than
100m2, the assessment will examine if:
• single houses or grouped dwellings
are the most efficient use of land or
if other development options (such
as multiple dwellings) would be more
appropriate;
• the location has infrastructure, amenities
and services that can support housing
at this higher density; and
• that the proposal is consistent with the
orderly and proper planning of the area.
The criteria outlined in Appendix 1 are
intended to ensure that lots less than
100m2 are located appropriately and
provide for diversity and affordability in
housing.

Position Statement:
2
Housing on lots less than 100m2
March 2024
4. Implementation 4.1 Transitional arrangement for 5. Review and future 6. Further information
existing structure plans R-Codes amendment
All locational, siting and configuration Enquiries or correspondence should be
criteria outlined in Appendix 1 must The first version of this position statement sent by email to dbe@dplh.wa.gov.au or
The WAPC will monitor and review the
be met and an R100-SL density code (June 2019) instructed structure plans by post to:
implementation of housing on lots
applied. The structure plan or scheme to impose a R80 density coding for the
less than 100m2, with a view to include
amendment report will outline that the relevant lots as the R100-SL density Director Design and Built Environment
the locational criteria in the future
area being developed for housing on lots coding did not exist. Provided that the Department of Planning,
Neighbourhood Design State Planning
less than 100m2 can be subdivided to approved structure plan conformed with Lands and Heritage
Policy.
create minimum 80m2 lot sizes. A local the requirements of the first version of this Locked Bag 2506
development plan (LDP) should not be position statement (June 2019), lots less Perth, WA, 6001
prepared for these locations as the than 100m2 may continue to be created in
Please quote reference DP/17/00098
R-Codes provide the relevant development the relevant areas of the structure plan.
standards.
This Position Statement is published at:
Where the structure plan includes a www.wa.gov.au/dplh
residential density code range or band, the
structure plan will identify that a residential
density code plan (R-Code plan) is to
be approved by the WAPC prior to the
consideration of any subdivision.
This residential density plan will need to
specify the area which is to be developed
(with a density code of R100-SL, a
minimum lot size of 80m2 and no average
lot size requirement).
The structure plan or scheme amendment
will need to demonstrate that lots less
than 100m2 will be integrated within
the wider development area and there
will be a continuous activated street
frontage able to accommodate on-street
visitor parking, street trees, shared use
paths/footpaths, refuse collection, urban
water management and utility services
(in accordance with local planning
scheme and Liveable Neighbourhoods
requirements, as applicable).

Position Statement:
3
Housing on lots less than 100m2
March 2024
Appendix 1 secondary or district centres Siting and configuration:
(not within 200 metres of the activity
• frontage to a street or public right-of-
Criteria for lots less than 100m2 centre or within the activity centre itself
way. The street or public right-of-way
– refer figure A)
The following criteria provide guidance for must accommodate and maximise on
the consideration and determination of • to be located within 200 metres street parking for visitors (preferably
integrated subdivision and development or 400 metres, using the walkable on both sides of the street), street
of housing on lots less than 100m2. catchment technique (refer Liveable trees and a minimum 1.5 metre-wide
Neighbourhoods), of the lot boundary pedestrian footpath
All proposals must be considered on of the core or largest commercial land
• located and occupies street corner sites
individual merit, having due regard to the holding in any existing or proposed
or an entire street block end, including
following criteria. local and neighbourhood centre
any laneway
respectively (refer figure B)
Locational criteria: • minimum two and maximum four
• to be located within 150 metres, using
storey building height (refer R-Codes
• to be selectively used as an integrated the walkable catchment technique
Volume 1, Part C, C2.10).
housing type to transition between (refer Liveable Neighbourhoods), Figure A: Location in relation to a
higher density (urban/multi-storey of local or neighbourhood public secondary and district centre
commercial, mixed use and apartment open space (as defined in Liveable
development) and low density Neighbourhoods), preferably fronting
(suburban/single and two-storey or otherwise overlooking public open
single house and grouped dwelling space
development) residential areas
• not located within 800 metres of the
• not to be the only or predominate lot lot boundary of the core or largest
and development type in any street commercial landholding in any
block strategic metropolitan centre.
• to be located between 200 metres
and 800 metres, using the walkable
catchment technique (refer Liveable
Neighbourhoods), of the lot boundary
of the core or largest commercial land
holding in any existing or proposed
Figure B: Location in relation to a local
and neighbourhood centre