Local Planning
Policy 2.23
Register of Significant
Trees and Vegetation
Areas
fremantle.wa.gov.au

Register of Significant Trees and Vegetation
Areas
Statutory background
The Schedule 2 Deemed Provisions of the Planning and Development (Local Planning
Schemes) Regulations 2015 are to be read as though part of City’s Local Planning Scheme
(LPS4).
Clause 67 of the Deemed Provisions defines matters to be considered by local government
in determining a development application and includes, amongst other things:
• whether any trees or vegetation should be preserved; and
• any local planning policy for the Scheme area.
Clause 3 of the Deemed Provisions allows local government to prepare a local planning
policy in respect of any matter relating to the planning and development of the Scheme
area.
Schedule A of LPS4 makes provision for Council to create and maintain a register:
Clause 13A Conservation of Significant Trees or Vegetation Areas
(1) The Council may establish and maintain a register of significant trees to identify
those trees or vegetation areas within the Scheme area considered worthy of
conservation under the provisions of the Scheme, together with a description of
each tree or vegetation area and the reasons for its entry.
(2) In considering a proposal to include a place on the register of significant trees,
the Council shall –
(a) notify in writing the owner and occupier of the place where the tree is
located and provide them with a copy of the description referred to in
clause 4.1 and the reasons for the proposed entry,
(b) invite submissions on the proposal from the owner and occupier of the
place within 21 days of the date specified in the notice,
(c) carry out such other consultations as it thinks fit, and
(d) consider any submissions made and resolve to enter the place on the
register of significant trees with or without modification or reject the
proposal after consideration of the submissions.
1/13

Local Planning Policy 1.7 – Development Exempt from Approval Under Local Planning
Scheme No. 4 permits tree and vegetation removal on private land without approval
UNLESS:
• the tree or vegetation is identified on a significant tree or vegetation register;
• the tree or vegetation is required to be retained as a condition of planning
approval; or
• the tree is Regulated Tree and its removal is not exempt under Local Planning
Policy 2.26: Tree Retention.
This policy applies as a Local Planning Policy prepared under Clause 3 of the Deemed
Provisions.
Purpose
The purpose of this policy is to:
• Define criteria for the inclusion or removal of trees and vegetation areas on the
Significant Trees and Vegetation Areas Register (‘the Register’).
• Provide guidance for the assessment of development applications for sites including
trees and vegetation areas listed on the Register.
Application
This policy applies to land subject to the provisions of LPS4. Land and development
outside the control of LPS4 (including works on reserved land by a public authority) are
not bound by the provisions of LPS4 or this policy and so there is a presumption against
inclusion of trees and vegetation areas on the Register which are not on zoned land.
Policy statement
1. Criteria for inclusion on Significant Trees and Vegetation Areas Register
1.1. Nominations for trees or vegetation areas must be authorised by the owner(s) of the
land on which the tree is located at the time of nomination.
1.2. Nominations will be assessed against the following criteria:
(a) Healthy specimen with ongoing viability.
(b) Species not a weed of national interest.
(c) Particular significance based on at least one of the following:
2/13

i. Botanic / horticultural value
Tree(s) or vegetation may:
• be a rare or endangered species;
• be of a significant size or specimen for its species; or
• have special scientific value.
ii. Visual / aesthetic / landmark value
Tree(s) or vegetation may:
• have significant visual and aesthetic qualities e.g. size/form/shape/
colour/texture; or
• create a significant landmark.
iii. Heritage value
Tree(s) or vegetation may:
• be of high cultural heritage significance defined against historic, social,
spiritual, rarity and representativeness values.
iv. Ecological value not otherwise protected through environmental
legislation
Tree(s) or vegetation may:
• provide significant habitat and/or seed source;
• represent remnant pre-European tree or vegetation;
• have special ecological significance; or
• provide substantial canopy cover.
v. The potential of a juvenile tree to become significant by virtue of height
at maturity, native food source and rarity.
Species will only to be considered if endemic to the area, listed in the Urban
Forest Plan and a minimum of 6m of height.
1.3. In assessing the ongoing viability of the nominated tree / vegetation, consideration
may be given to the following:
• The development potential of the site and prospects for retaining the tree or
vegetation in future development.
• Proximity to and impact on buildings and / or infrastructure.
• Proximity to boundary and impact on neighbouring property.
3/13

• The root structure and attributes of the plant and its propensity to be affected by
changes to the environment outside the lot boundaries (e.g. development on
neighbouring land).
Trees with a limited prospect of long-term retention or lifespan will not be included.
1.4. In assessing the ecological value of trees and vegetation areas, consideration will be
given to proximity to recognised ecological linkages or biodiversity corridors.
1.5. Nominations for inclusion, and requests for removal of trees and vegetation areas
from the Register made independent of a development application will be assessed
annually, in accordance with any applicable procedure.
2. Development application for sites including a tree / vegetation area on the
Register
2.1. Development shall avoid detrimental impact on the registered tree / vegetation
where feasible.
2.2. Applications to remove a tree or vegetation area on the Register not associated with
other development will be assessed against the criteria and considerations listed in 1
above. Withdrawal of the support of the owner of the land (or subsequent owner of
the land) will not be considered sufficient reason for removal.
2.3. Applications for other forms of development involving or likely to result in removal of
a tree or vegetation areas on the Register will be considered under the following
circumstances:
(i) Where retention is likely to cause damage or injury to infrastructure, services,
buildings or health and safety
Tree/vegetation removal is permissible where it has been clearly demonstrated
that the tree/vegetation roots and/or branches are likely to cause damage or
injury to –
a. water, stormwater, power, gas, telecommunications or sewer lines, or
b. the structural integrity of a building or structure of value, or
c. the safe and efficient operation of an existing public road, private road,
right-of-way, or formed accessway, or the integrity of a base course of an
existing public road, private road, right-of-way, or formed vehicle
accessway; or
d. health and safety of a person/s; and
e. all other reasonable remedial treatments have been determined to be
ineffective.
(ii) Where the tree or vegetation is structurally unsound or in poor health
Tree/vegetation removal is permissible where it has been clearly demonstrated
that the tree / vegetation is:
4/13

a. imminently dangerous (refer Exempted Development below); or
b. in poor health with a low chance of survival; and
c. all other reasonable remedial treatments have been determined to be
ineffective.
(iii) Where the retention of tree/vegetation on a development site would preclude
permissible development
Tree/vegetation removal is permissible where it has been clearly demonstrated
that the location of the tree / vegetation:
a. renders development of the site in accordance with its zoned purpose
unfeasible.
2.4. In assessing proposals, applicants may be requested to provide professional
evidence such as an aboricultural report or a structural engineer’s report
demonstrating compliance with the above criteria.
2.5. Where removal is supported, replacement of the tree or vegetation in a suitable
location may be sought as a condition of approval.
2.6. Development on lots containing registered tree or vegetation shall comply with AS
4970 – 2009 Protection of trees on development sites.
Advisory notes:
Exempt Development: Works urgently necessary for public safety, safety or sectary of
plant or equipment, maintenance of essential services, or protection of the environment is
exempt from the requirement to obtain development approval under LPS4. Demonstration
of compliance with this definition may be sought where works are undertaken without
approval.
Pruning: Pruning of a tree or vegetation on the Register is permitted where it does not
constitute removal. Pruning is encouraged to comply with Australian Standards (AS 4373
– 2007 Pruning of amenity trees) and may:
(i) Involve removal of dead wood, treatment of disease, or is in the general
interests of the health of the tree; or
(ii) Address risk to public or private safety where other alternatives are not viable;
or
(iii) Address damage to buildings or structures of value where other alternatives are
not viable; or
(iv) Maintain the aesthetic appearance and structural integrity of the tree or
vegetation.
5/13

Responsibility and review information
Responsible officer: Manager Strategic Planning and City Design
Document 27 February 2019 – SPD1902-3
adoption/approval
details
Document 22 May 2019 – SPT1905-3
amendment details
21 October 2020 – SPT 2010-02
14 February 2024 – C2402-5
28 February 2024 – C2402-24
11 September 2024 – C2409-6
12 March 2025 - C2503-4
Next review date 12 March 2028
6/13

Procedure for Administering the Register of
Significant Trees and Vegetation Areas
Part 1 – Nomination and inclusion of trees or vegetation
areas on the Register:
The process for nomination and inclusion of a significant tree or vegetation area on the
Register is set out in 6.12 Schedule A – Supplementary provisions to the deemed
provisions, Clause 13A Conservation of Significant Trees or Vegetation Areas of Local
Planning Scheme No.4 (LPS4). The procedure for including a tree or vegetation area on
the Register is as follows:
(i) Applicant is to complete the register of significant trees or vegetation areas on
private land Nomination Form, as provided in Appendix A, to apply for a
significant tree or vegetation to be included on the Register. The application
should address the criteria for inclusion listed in the policy.
Note: The City will not accept an application for a significant tree or vegetation
area to be included on the Register without the landowner’s consent.
(ii) Applicant to lodge the application with the City of Fremantle’s strategic planning
team by:
Email (preferred method): planning@fremantle.wa.gov.au
Post: Planning Services, City of Fremantle, PO Box 807, FREMANTLE WA 6959
Hand Deliver: City of Fremantle Administration Building
(iii) The City will undertake an assessment of nominated trees and vegetation areas in
accordance with part one of the policy. This assessment will involve internal
referrals to relevant departments (e.g. Parks, Heritage) and may include the
commission of an independent arborist’s report. Assessments may be deferred to
align with annual reporting [see (v) below].
(iv) The City will provide the assessment to the landowner and occupier of the place
(if applicable) and invite comment from them and immediately adjoining
neighbours for a period of 21 days.
(v) A report on the nominated trees and vegetation areas and public submissions
received will be submitted to Council annually (generally between February and
April) for a decision on their inclusion on the Register [contained in Appendix B].
(vi) The landowner, occupier and any person who made a submission on the
nomination will be notified of Council’s decision, and the City’s records (including
GIS mapping) will be updated accordingly.
7/13

Part 2 – Removal of trees or vegetation areas from the
Register:
A. Where removal does not form part of a development application
(i) Requests for removal of trees or vegetation from the Register which do not form
part of a Development Application should be submitted in writing to the City and
be accompanied by justification addressing the criteria listed in part one of the
policy including, where appropriate, supporting technical documents such as an
arborist’s report or structural engineering report demonstrating relevant criteria
are met.
(ii) The City will undertake an assessment of trees and vegetation areas in
accordance with part one of this policy. This assessment may include the
commission of an independent arborist’s report. Assessments may be deferred to
align with annual reporting (see v above).
(iii) Where the City’s assessment does not support the request for removal, the City
will provide the assessment to the landowner and occupier of the place (if
applicable) and invite comment from them for a period of 21 days. The City may,
at its discretion, also invite comment from adjacent neighbours.
(iv) A report on trees and vegetation areas requested for removal, along with any
public submissions received will be submitted to Council annually (generally
between February and April) for a decision on their removal from the Register
[contained in Appendix B].
(v) The landowner, occupier and any person who made a submission on the
nomination will be notified of Council’s decision, and the City’s records (including
GIS mapping) will be updated accordingly.
B. Where removal forms part of a development application
(i) The City will undertake an assessment of trees and vegetation areas in
accordance with part one of the policy as part of the statutory planning
assessment of the development application. This assessment will involve internal
referrals to relevant departments (e.g. Parks, Heritage) and may include the
commission of an independent arborist’s report and / or consultation with
adjacent landowners.
(ii) All trees or vegetation granted development approval for removal will be
automatically removed from the Register without further consultation with the
landowner or other parties, and the City’s records (including GIS mapping)
updated accordingly.
8/13

Appendix A – Nomination Form
Information on tree / vegetation for nomination:
Please tick appropriate:
Single tree / plant
Group of trees / plants Number of trees / plants in group: ……………………
Location of tree / vegetation Tree / vegetation details
Street number: ………………………… Common name: ……………………
Lot number: ………………………… Latin / botanical name: ……………………
Street name: ………………………… Height (approximate) (m): ……………………
Suburb: ………………………… Girth 1.4m above ground (m): ……………………
Location on the site: ………………………… Age (approximate): ……………………
Why do you think the tree / vegetation is important
(please tick all applicable):
Botanical / horticultural value (rare / endangered species or genetic type)
Visual / aesthetic / landmark value (size / form / colour / texture / landmark)
Heritage value (social / spiritual / rarity / representative)
Ecological value (provides significant habitat / seed source / remnant of pre-European
vegetation)
Nominated by:
Name: ………………………………………………………………………………………
Address: ………………………………………………………………………………………
Telephone: ………………………………………………………………………………………
Date: ………………………………………………………………………………………
9/13

Owner’s consent:
Consent from the owner(s) of the land upon which the tree or vegetation is located must
be obtained when nominating trees / vegetation. The City of Fremantle will not consider a
nomination without owner’s consent.
Name: ……………………………………………… Signature: ………………………………………………
(Please include additional names and signatures separately where multiple owners exist)
Additional information:
To assist the nomination process please provide the following additional information as an
attachment to this form:
☐ Any additional information to support your nomination (e.g. cover letter,
media articles, historical information, arborist’s report etc.).
☐ Photograph(s) of the tree(s) / vegetation.
☐ Site plan indicating location of the tree(s) / vegetation within the site
including distance to boundaries, buildings and structures.
10/13

Appendix B – Register of Significant Trees and Vegetation Areas
Tree ID Common and Address and coordinates Description Statement of significance
botanical name (latitude and longitude)
19-01 Norfolk Island Pine 11-13 Harvest Road, North Tree on private The Norfolk Island Pine on 11-13 Harvest Road,
(Araucaria Fremantle property North Fremantle, which was planted in the late
heterophylla) Nineteenth Century to Inter-War Era, has cultural
-32.034780, 115.755177
heritage significance for the following reasons:
• It has historic and social value as a remnant
of the early residential development of Bruce
Town when larger houses were set back from
the street in spacious gardens.
• it has historic value as a representative
example of early garden design in Fremantle
that made use of a limited palette of trees
and plants favoured for their aesthetic
qualities as well as their tolerance for the
local conditions.
• It has aesthetic and landmark value for its
distinctive appearance and presence in the
area for over 100 years.
• It has social value, and its value to the
community is demonstrated by its inclusion
in the Fremantle Society’s Photographic
11/13

Tree ID Common and Address and coordinates Description Statement of significance
botanical name (latitude and longitude)
Survey 1978 – 1980, its subsequent
protection by the Fremantle Council during
the redevelopment of the site in the late
1980s, its inclusion in the Fremantle
Municipal Heritage Inventory in 2000, and its
inclusion in the Heritage List in 2008.
19-02 Norfolk Island Pine 15 Harvest Road, North Tree on private The Norfolk Island Pine on 15 Harvest Road, North
(Araucaria Fremantle property Fremantle, which was most likely planted in the
heterophylla) Inter-War Era, has cultural heritage significance for
-32.034188, 115.755211
the following reasons:
• It has historic and social value as a remnant
of the early residential development of Bruce
Town, when larger houses were set back
from the street in spacious gardens.
• It has historic value for its 50-year
association with the Salvation Army, which
ran a maternity hospital and migrants’ hostel
on the site between the 1910s and the
1960s.
• It has historic value as a representative
example of early garden design in Fremantle
that made use of a limited palette of trees
and plants favoured for their aesthetic
qualities, as well as their tolerance for the
local conditions.
12/13

Tree ID Common and Address and coordinates Description Statement of significance
botanical name (latitude and longitude)
• It has aesthetic and landmark value for its
distinctive appearance and presence in the
area for over 100 years.
• It has social value to the community, as
demonstrated by its inclusion in the
Fremantle Society Photographic Survey 1978
– 1980, and its inclusion in the Fremantle
Municipal Heritage Inventory in 2000 and the
Heritage List in 2008.
19-06 Rose Gum 7/18 John Street, North Tree on private The Rose Gum on 7/18 John Street, North Fremantle
(Eucalyptus Fremantle property has significance for the following reasons:
grandis)
-32.033254, 115.757699 • Visual/aesthetic value
• Habitat for local fauna.
19-07 River Red Gum 7/18 John Street, North Tree on private The River Red Gum on 7/18 John Street, North
(Eucalyptus Fremantle property Fremantle has significance for the following reasons:
camaldulensis)
-32.033387, 115.757630 • Visual/aesthetic value
• Habitat for local fauna.
24-01 Lemon-scented 6 Douglas Street, Fremantle Tree on private The Lemon-scented Gum on 6 Douglas Street,
Gum (Corymbia property Fremantle has significance for the following reasons:
-32.062644, 115.753147
citriodora)
• It is a landmark to the neighbourhood and
provides significant visual and aesthetic value
to everyone in the neighbourhood.
13/13