Commercial, Mixed Use and Service
Commercial Zone Local Planning Policy
Responsible directorate: Planning and Community Development
Objectives:
• To provide development standards for commercial buildings that assist in facilitating appropriate
built form and functional commercial centres.
• To facilitate the development or redevelopment of commercial centres that respond to the local
context.
• To ensure the design and siting of commercial development provides a high standard of
amenity, no blank facades visible from the street and activation of external areas.
• To encourage high quality, pedestrian friendly, street-orientated development that integrates with
surrounding areas.
• To create vibrant mixed use commercial centres that are the focal point for the community by
locating housing, employment and retail activities together.
• To establish a framework for the assessment of applications for development within these
zones.
1. Authority:
This policy has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2 of the deemed provisions
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 which allows the
local government to prepare local planning policies relating to planning and development within
the Scheme area.
2. Application:
This policy applies to all non-residential development on ‘Commercial’, ‘Mixed Use’ and ‘Service
Commercial’ zoned land in the City of Joondalup. Where equivalent development provisions are
contained within an approved activity centre plan or local development plan, those provisions
shall prevail.
Commercial, Mixed Use and Service Commercial Zone 1

3. Definitions:
In addition to the definitions contained within the City of Joondalup Local Planning Scheme No. 3
(the Scheme), the following definitions apply:
“coastal area” means land within 300 metres of the horizontal shoreline datum of a coast, as
defined within State Planning Policy 2.6 State Coastal Planning Policy.
“commercial frontage” means the portion of the building that fronts the street, car park (if
located in front of the building) or key pedestrian route.
“external fixtures” means utilities, equipment, plant or other structures necessary for a building
to achieve efficient, comfortable operating outcomes and may include rainwater storage tanks,
air conditioning units, communication, power and water infrastructure, letterboxes or other
fixtures necessary for the use of the building.
“height” when used in relation to a building, means the maximum vertical distance between
natural ground level and the finished roof height directly above.
“landscape, landscaping or landscaped” means land developed with garden beds, shrubs
and trees, or by the planting of lawns, and includes such features as rockeries or ornamental
ponds.
“small scale renewable energy system” means a solar energy system of up to 100 kilowatts
capacity or a small wind energy system of up to 10 kilowatts capacity.
“solar energy system” means a system which converts energy from the sun into useable
electrical energy, heats water or produces hot air or a similar function through the use of solar
panels.
“wind energy system” means equipment that converts and then stores or transfers energy
from the wind into usable forms of energy. This equipment includes any base, blade, foundation,
generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries or other component
used in the system.
4. Statement:
The City of Joondalup supports the creation of vibrant mixed use commercial centres.
Appropriately designed and located commercial centres provide economic and social benefits to
the community in which they are situated. They should be a focal point for the community and
provide housing, employment and retail opportunities.
This policy provides development provisions for non-residential development that aim to create
high quality mixed use commercial centres. It should be read in conjunction with the Scheme
and any relevant structure plans, precinct structure plans, local development plans or other local
planning policies.
Commercial, Mixed Use and Service Commercial Zone 2

5. Details:
5.1. Building Setbacks:
Buildings shall be setback from property boundaries as follows:
Commercial and Mixed Use Zone
Boundary Minimum Setback distance
(a) Street setback (includes (i) 3.5 metres, with the exception of an awning which may be
secondary street) setback at 1.5 metres.
(b) Side/rear setbacks (i) 3.0 metres
(c) Right of way/laneway (i) Nil
setback
Service Commercial Zone
Boundary Minimum Setback distance
(a) Street setback (includes (i) 3.5 metres, with the exception of an awning which may be
secondary street) setback at 1.5 metres.
(b) Side/rear setbacks (i) Nil, or where a lot abuts the Residential zone, a minimum
of 3.0 metres.
(c) Right of way/laneway (i) Nil
setback
5.2. Building Height:
The maximum building height as measured from the natural ground level is to be in
accordance with the following tables:
Zone Maximum height of Maximum total building height (m)
wall (m) Gable, skillion and Hipped and
concealed roof pitched roof
Commercial R40 7 8 10
Mixed Use R40 7 8 10
Zone Maximum total building height (m)
Commercial R80* 15
Mixed Use R80* 15
Service Commercial 9
* Where a lot abuts the Residential zone, the maximum building height within 6 metres of the
common boundary shall be in accordance with Commercial and Mixed Use R40.
5.3. Coastal Area Building Height:
a. The maximum building height as measured from the natural ground level is to be in
accordance with Commercial and Mixed Use R40.
b. Notwithstanding clause 5.3(a), the building height in precinct structure plans and
local development plans must take into account:
i. existing built form, topography and landscape character of the surrounding
area;
Commercial, Mixed Use and Service Commercial Zone 3

ii. building siting and design;
iii. bulk and scale of buildings and the potential to unreasonably overshadow
adjoining properties or the foreshore;
iv. visual permeability of the foreshore and ocean from nearby residential areas,
roads and public spaces; and
v. whether the development is sympathetic to the desired character, built form
and amenity of the surrounding area.
5.4. Built Form and Design:
Development is to be in accordance with the following requirements:
Design Element Development Requirement
(a) Materials (i) Buildings must be constructed of high quality materials
including but not limited to stone, concrete, brick, timber
and glass.
(ii) Concrete walls that are visible from an adjoining property
or public realm must be painted and provided with an
articulated or detailed finish.
(b) Articulation (i) Buildings must incorporate appropriate design features to
enhance appearance, create visual interest and reduce
blank walls, including a combination of the following:
• Varied colours, textures, finishes and materials;
• Varied roof forms and design;
• Balconies and balustrades;
• Windows, screens and sun shading devices.
(c) Windows and glazing (i) The ground floor commercial frontage must have a
minimum of 50% clear glazed windows.
(ii) The ground floor commercial frontage windows must have
a maximum sill height of 700mm above finished floor level.
(iii) Where window security devices are provided, they must be
installed on the inside of a window and be 75% visually
permeable.
(iv) Windows in an external wall which faces north, east or
west must be protected from direct summer sun.
(d) Commercial frontage (i) Ground floor external tenancies must have an entrance
onto the commercial frontage and be outward facing to
facilitate activation of the commercial frontage.
(e) Building entrances (i) Building entrances must be clearly defined and easily
identifiable from the street and public realm.
(ii) Building entrances must directly front the street, car park
and key pedestrian routes.
(f) Pedestrian shelter (i) Buildings must provide a continuous pedestrian shelter
along all commercial frontages to a minimum height of 3
metres and a minimum depth of 1.5 metres.
5.5. Retaining Walls:
Provision Development Requirement
(a) Retaining walls (i) Retaining walls visible from a street or car park greater
than 1 metre in height must be tiered so no tier is greater
than 1 metre in height. A landscaping area of no less than
1 metre in width shall be provided between tiers.
Commercial, Mixed Use and Service Commercial Zone 4

5.6. Parking and Access:
5.6.1. Car Parking Standards:
Car parking bays are to be provided in accordance with the following table:
Use Class Number of on-site parking bays
Amusement Parlour, Cinema/Theatre, Civic 1 per 4 people accommodated
Use, Club Premises, Funeral Parlour, Night
Club, Place of Worship, Recreation –
Private, Small Bar
Betting Agency, Bulky Goods Showroom, 1 per 50m2 NLA
Community Purpose, Exhibition Centre,
Liquor Store – large, Motor Vehicle
Repairs, Office
Bed and Breakfast 1 per guest room
Caretaker’s Dwelling 1 per dwelling
Consulting Rooms, Medical Centre, 5 bays per practitioner or 5 bays per
Veterinary Centre consulting room, whichever is greater
Convenience Store, Home Store, Market 1 per 25m2 NLA
Motor Vehicle Wash 1 per employee
Educational Establishment 1 per 3 students accommodated
Primary School 2 per classroom but not less than 10
Secondary School 2 per classroom but not less than 10
Tertiary College 1 per 3 students accommodated
Fast Food Outlet 1 per 4 people in seated areas plus 1 per
15m2 for non seating serving areas
Garden Centre 1 per 500m2 of site area used for display
plus 1 per 10m2 NLA internal display area
Hospital 1 per 3 beds plus 1 per staff member on
duty
Hotel, Motel 1 per bedroom/unit plus 1 per 5m2 of bar
and dining area
Motor Vehicle, Boat or Caravan Sales 1 per 200m2 display area and 1 bay per
employee
Reception Centre, Restaurant/Cafe 1 per 4 people accommodated or 1 per
5m² of dining room, whichever is greater
Residential Building 1 per 2 people accommodated
Residential Aged Care Facility 1 per 5 beds plus 1 per staff member on
duty
Service Station 5 per service bay plus 1 per 20m2 NLA of
sales/display area
Shop/ Shopping Centres* under 30,000m2, 1 per 20m2 NLA
Liquor Store – small, Lunch Bar, Restricted
Premises
Shopping Centres* from 30,000 to 1500 bays for the first 30,000m2 NLA plus
50,000m2 4.5 per 100m2 NLA thereafter
Shopping Centres* greater than 50,000m2 2400 bays for the first 50,000m2 NLA plus
4 per 100m2 NLA thereafter
Tavern 1 per 5m2 of bar and dining area
Trade Supplies, Warehouse/Storage 1 per 100m2 NLA
* The shopping centre parking standard applies to all non-residential land uses located within
a shopping centre, regardless of the specific land use.
Commercial, Mixed Use and Service Commercial Zone 5

5.6.2. Car Park Location and Design:
Car park access and design is to be in accordance with the following requirements:
Design Element Development Requirement
(a) Car park design (i) Car parks should be consolidated where practicable.
(ii) Car parks shall be designed in accordance with
Australian Standards AS 2890.1 and/or AS 2890.2 as
amended from time to time.
(b) Vehicle access (i) The number of crossovers should be kept to the
minimum to provide efficient ingress and egress.
(ii) The location of crossovers should minimise traffic or
pedestrian hazards and not conflict with
pedestrian/cyclist paths.
(iii) Vehicles are required to enter and exit the site in
forward gear.
(c) Pedestrian access (i) A footpath must be provided from the car park and the
street to the building entrance and along all street
frontages.
(d) Reciprocal car parking (i) Where car parking and access is approved on
and access neighbouring properties that relies on the reciprocal
movement of vehicles and pedestrians across those
properties, the necessary reciprocal access and
parking shall be allowed at all times to the local
government’s satisfaction.
5.6.3. Scooter and Motorbike Parking Standards:
For every 30 car bays required, the 30th car bay shall be replaced with two
scooter/motorcycle parking bays to be designed in accordance with relevant
Australian standards. The car parking bays required under 5.6.1 shall be reduced
accordingly.
5.6.4. Bicycle Parking Standards:
Bicycle parking is to be provided in accordance with the following table and relevant
Australian standards. Bicycle parking is only required to be provided for new
buildings; however it is encouraged to be provided for existing developments and
additions to existing developments.
Use Class Employee Bicycle Visitor Bicycle Parking
Parking
Amusement Parlour, N/A 1 per 50 people
Cinema/Theatre, Community accommodated
Purpose, Civic Use, Club
Premises, Fast Food Outlet,
Place of Worship, Reception
Centre, Recreation – Private,
Restaurant/Cafe, Small Bar
Betting Agency, Convenience 1 per 100m2 NLA 1 per 50m2 NLA
Store, Home Store, Liquor Store
– small, Lunch Bar, Market
Consulting Rooms, Medical 1 per 8 practitioners 1 per 4 practitioners
Centre, Veterinary Centre
Liquor Store – large, Restricted 1 per 300m2 NLA 1 per 500m2 NLA
Premises, Shop
Commercial, Mixed Use and Service Commercial Zone 6

Use Class Employee Bicycle Visitor Bicycle Parking
Parking
Educational Establishment N/A 1 per 20 students
Primary School 5 per classroom
Secondary School 5 per classroom
Tertiary College 1 per 20 students
Hospital, Nursing Home 1 per 15 beds 1 per 30 beds
Hotel, Motel, Tavern 1 per 150m2 of bar and 1 per 100m2 of bar and
dining area dining area
Residential Aged Care Facility 1 per 10 units N/A
Bulky Goods Showroom, 1 per 750m2 NLA 1 per 1000m2 NLA
Exhibition Centre, Trade
Supplies
Office 1 per 200m2 NLA 1 per 1000m2 NLA
Shopping Centres under 1 per 1500m2 NLA 1 per 3000m2 NLA
30,000m2
Shopping Centres from 30,000 1 per 1500m2 NLA 1 per 3000m2 NLA
to 50,000m2
Shopping Centres greater than 1 per 3000m2 NLA 1 per 5000m2 NLA
50,000m2
5.6.5. End of Trip Facilities:
All developments that are required to provide 6 or more employee bicycle parking
bays must provide end of trip facilities, designed in accordance with the following
criteria:
a. A minimum of one female and one male shower, located in separate change
rooms or a minimum of two separate unisex showers and change rooms.
b. Additional shower facilities to be provided at a rate of one shower for every 10
additional bicycle parking bays.
c. A locker for every bicycle parking bay provided.
d. The end-of-trip facilities are to be located as close as possible to the bicycle
parking facilities.
5.7. Landscaping:
Landscaping is to be in accordance with the following requirements:
Design Element Development Requirement
(a) % Landscaping (i) A minimum of 8% of the area of a lot shall be
landscaped.
(ii) The landscaped area shall include a minimum strip of 1.5
metres wide adjacent to all street boundaries.
(b) Size (i) Any landscaped area shall have a minimum width of 1.0
metre and distributed in areas of not less than 4.0 square
metres.
(c) Shade trees (i) Shade trees shall be provided and maintained in
uncovered car parks at the rate of one tree for every four
car parking bays.
Commercial, Mixed Use and Service Commercial Zone 7

5.8. Fencing:
Any fence located between the street alignment and 6 metres from the street alignment, or
the street alignment and a building, whichever is the lesser distance, must be visually
permeable above 0.75 metres from natural ground level, and must have a maximum height
of 2.0 metres from natural ground level.
5.9. Servicing:
Servicing, deliveries, lighting and waste collection should be considered as part of the
integral design of the building. Services should be screened from view and located at the
rear of the building where practicable. Servicing is to be in accordance with the following
requirements:
Provision Development Requirement
(a) Service access (i) Service access must be provided to all commercial
buildings to cater for the loading and unloading of goods,
and waste collection.
(b) Service yards (i) Service yards must be screened from view and located at
the rear of a building.
(ii) Service yards must not be located directly adjacent to a
Residential zoned lot.
(c) Bin storage areas (i) Bin storage areas must be screened from view by a wall
not less than 1.8 metres in height, constructed of brick,
masonry or other approved material.
(ii) Bin storage areas must be accessible to waste collection
vehicles and not adversely affect car parking and vehicular
or pedestrian access.
(d) External fixtures (i) External fixtures must be screened from view from the
street through building design and located on the roof,
basement or at the rear of the building.
(e) Lighting (i) To minimise the negative impacts of lighting, lighting is to
be installed in accordance with Australian Standard AS
4282.
5.10. Sea Containers:
The location and use of sea containers should not detract from the amenity, character and
streetscape of an area.
a. The permanent use of sea containers is to be in accordance with the following
requirements:
Provision Development Requirement
(a) Visibility (i) The sea container is not visible from any street or adjoining
property.
(ii) Where visible from an area internal to the site, the sea
container is painted or clad with material in a colour that
matches, or is complementary to, the colour of the existing
buildings on the property.
(b) Location (i) The sea container is not located within any approved car
park, access way or landscaped area.
b. The temporary use of a sea container can be considered in accordance with the
following requirements:
Commercial, Mixed Use and Service Commercial Zone 8

i. The sea container is only used in conjunction with building construction or
subdivision work that is occurring or approved to occur on the subject site, up
to a maximum of 12 months; or
ii. The sea container is only used for the loading or unloading of goods that is
occurring on the subject site up to a maximum of 7 days; and
iii. The sea container is positioned so as not to obscure vehicle sightlines.
iv. A formal request is received and a letter is issued from the City approving the
temporary nature of the sea container, and its period of use, in accordance
with the provisions of subclause 61(2)(f) of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015.
v. Clause iv. above does not apply if the sea container is in place for less than 48
hours.
5.11. Small Scale Renewable Energy Systems:
The development of small scale renewable energy systems is encouraged in order to
reduce the production of greenhouse gas emissions. Small scale renewable energy
systems are to be in accordance with the following requirements:
Provision Development Requirement
(a) Solar energy system (i) Solar energy systems must be integrated into the overall
design of the building and located on rooftops so as not to
detract from the building itself or impose on the existing
streetscape.
(b) Wind energy system (i) The system must be well setback from any overhead power
lines.
(ii) The turbine system must be fitted with an automatic and
manual braking system or an over-speed protection device.
(iii) Unless colour-matched to the supporting roof, the wind
energy system and any tower structure must remain
painted or finished in the colour or finish applied by the
manufacturer.
(iv) No signage, other than the manufacturer’s or installer’s
identification, shall be attached to the system.
(v) Any electrical components and wires associated with a
small wind energy system must not be visible from the
street.
(vi) The system must not be located on a property/building on
the City’s Heritage List.
(vii) A maximum of 1 turbine per 1000m2 of lot area is permitted.
(viii) Turbines are not permitted on lots less than 1000m2.
(ix) The maximum height of a pole mounted system is 10m
above natural ground level.
(x) The maximum height of a roof mounted system is 7.5m
above the roofline.
(xi) The maximum blade diameter is 5.5m.
(xii) Not permitted between the building and street.
(xiii) A pole mounted system must be setback from side and rear
boundaries not less than half the total height of the wind
energy system.
(xiv) A roof mounted system must be setback a minimum of 7.5m
from a major opening of an adjoining building.
Commercial, Mixed Use and Service Commercial Zone 9

Creation date: October 2018 (CJ184-10/18)
Formerly:
Amendments: CJ147-08/23
Last reviewed: August 2023 (CJ147-02/23)
Related documentation: • Local Planning Scheme No. 3
File reference: 106157
Commercial, Mixed Use and Service Commercial Zone 10