OFFICIAL
Local Planning
Policy 1.9
Design Advisory
Committee & Principles of
Design
fremantle.wa.gov.au

OFFICIAL
LPP1.9 – Design Advisory Committee &
Principles of Design
Statutory background
The Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (the
Regulations) provide the ability for local governments to prepare a local planning policy on
any matter relevant to the planning scheme area.
Schedule A Clause 78B(6) of Local Planning Scheme No. 4 (LPS4) requires the Council
to establish and maintain a Design Advisory Committee to advise it on any matters
related to the design quality of development.
Schedule A Clause 78B(6) of LPS4 requires Council to prepare and adopt a local planning
policy that details the type and scale of development applications and planning
proposals that will be referred to the Design Advisory Committee.
Schedule A Clause 78B (6)(b) of LPS4 states that ‘notwithstanding the provisions of
any Local Planning Policy prepared under clause 78B(6)(a), the Council shall not
determine a development application that proposes a building with a building height
of 11 metres or greater in any zone other than the Residential or Industrial zones or
a development application proposed under clause 5.7 Special control provisions for
small infill development without first referring the application to the Design Advisory
Committee for advice and having regard to the advice provided by the Design Advisory
Committee.’
Schedule A Clause 78B (6)(c) of LPS4 outlines the matters to be considered by the
Design Advisory Committee in providing advice to the Council on the design quality of
the development, in association with the local planning policy prepared under Schedule
A Clause 78B (6)(a).
Introduction and purpose
The purpose of this local planning policy is to:
1. Detail the type and scale of development applications and planning proposals
that will be referred to the Design Advisory Committee; and
2. Provide additional provisions relating to the design matters listed under clause
Schedule A Clause 78B (6)(c) of LPS4.
1/13

OFFICIAL
Application
1. Development applications and planning proposals to be referred to the
Design Advisory Committee
In accordance with the Design Advisory Committee terms of reference adopted 23
May 2012, and amended 1 July 2018 (see Annexure 1) the role of the Design Advisory
Committee is:
• To provide design advice on all planning applications involving:
(a) any matter that relates to a planning policy relevant to the role of the
Committee;
(b) any building 11.0m or 3 storeys in height or greater in any zone other
than the Residential or Industrial zones;
(c) a development proposed under clause 5.7 Special Control Area
Provisions for small infill development
• To provide design advice in other circumstances in relation to any major
development proposal required by the Council or Planning Committee, or any
relevant Local Planning Scheme amendment, Structure Plan or Local Planning
Policy proposal.
2. Fee for service
Fees will be charged in accordance with the City’s Fees and Charges schedule.
Policy statement
3. Principles of design
In providing advice to the Council, the Design Advisory Committee shall have due
regard to the following principles to assist in determining the design quality of the
development:
1. Character – a place with its own identity
Successful places are distinctive and memorable, with a character that people
can appreciate easily. The positive attributes of a place and its people contribute
to its special character and sense of identity. They include landscape, building
traditions and materials, patterns of local life, and other factors that make one
place different from another.
When new development creates public spaces identical to those in every other
town, a place risks weakening its connection with its history and losing the things
that make it stand out when competing for investment and skilled people.
2/13

OFFICIAL
Objectives:
(i) New development should integrate into its landscape / townscape setting
and reinforce local distinctiveness.
(ii) New development should respond positively to the existing layout of
buildings, streets and spaces ensuring that adjacent buildings relate to one
another, that streets are connected and that spaces complement one
another.
(iii) New development should respond positively to local building forms and
patterns of development in their detailed layout and design.
(iv) Building materials, construction techniques and details should enhance
local distinctiveness.
(v) The scale, massing and height of new development should respond
positively to that of the adjoining buildings, the topography, the general
pattern of heights, and the views, vistas and landmarks of the place,
reinforcing a coherent local identity.
(vi) In designated areas new development should promote the re-
establishment of local distinctiveness that builds on the past and
reinvigorates locally distinctive patterns of development, landscape and
culture to provide the area with a ‘sense of place’.
2. Continuity and enclosure – A place where public and private spaces are clearly
distinguished
Buildings can define open spaces by enclosing them. The activities inside
buildings can bring life and activity to the edges of public spaces. Buildings can
also secure private open spaces by closing them off and overlooking them.
In places where the distinction between public and private open space is blurred,
responsibility for looking after open spaces is uncertain and privacy can be
compromised. Successful places therefore need a clear relationship between the
public fronts and private backs of buildings.
Objectives:
(i) Streets should be lively as a result of people coming and going from
buildings and drawn to the activities inside (retail, for example).
(ii) Streets should be made up of continuous building frontages and open
spaces where there are few gaps that could leave the street lifeless and
uninteresting.
(iii) Buildings should be used to enclose spaces and separate private from
public areas.
3/13

OFFICIAL
(iv) Buildings should overlook public spaces to improve surveillance and
public security.
3. Quality of the public realm - A place with well-designed, high quality public
spaces
Successful places have outdoor spaces that are attractive and comfortable.
These places will have invested in the public realm as a demonstration of civic
pride and the value attached to public life.
Outdoor spaces are important for the health of local people, encouraging sports
and healthy lifestyles. Public spaces can include parks and nature reserves, as
well as more formal squares and paved areas. Streets are also part of the public
realm. Designed with people in mind, they offer opportunities to meet and
socialise, bringing vitality to a place.
Objectives:
(i) Places should have public spaces and routes that are well-designed,
attractive, safe and uncluttered.
(ii) Places should provide open space that is easy for everyone to use,
including children, disabled and elderly people.
(iii) The public realm should provide a setting for important buildings and/or
public art. Works of art and well-designed street furniture integrated into
the design of public spaces give identity and enhance the sense of place.
(iv) Building materials should be durable, easy to maintain, and should weather
well over time.
(vi) Well-designed public space relates to the buildings around it.
(viii) The design of public spaces should take account of the micro-climate.
4. Ease of movement - A place that is easy to get to and move through
Movement through a place should always be easy for everyone who uses it,
whether by foot, bicycle, car or public transport. Pedestrians in particular should
be able to get around safely and conveniently. Making a place more walkable
and accessible will help reduce car use and in turn reduce congestion and air
pollution and improve public health.
Objectives:
(i) Places should be connected with each other and easy to move through.
(ii) Places should provide a choice of routes, especially for pedestrians.
4/13

OFFICIAL
(iii) The place should prioritise pedestrians over vehicles.
(iv) The layout of the place should minimise the need to travel and exploit any
proximity to public transport.
(v) Pedestrian movement at street level should be given priority over
movement at other levels.
(vi) Transport routes should incorporate urban design qualities and not just
traffic considerations.
(vii) A development’s access and circulation should contribute to a fine-grain
network of direct and connected routes within and beyond the site and
avoid creating large non-permeable blocks.
5. Legibility - A place that is easy to navigate
Successful places are comprehensible and easy to navigate. Knowing where you
are and how to get around is essential to enjoying a place and all its attractions.
We intuitively use all sorts of clues to navigate. The size and type of buildings
tell us whether we are on an important route or a side street. Buildings,
landscape or public art can stand out from the everyday fabric of a place, making
its location more memorable. This is important for people who are visiting for
the first time and want to feel confident and relaxed in order to enjoy a place
and all its attractions, and not
anxious about getting lost. But it is also very important for people with
disabilities, who may have difficulty navigating.
Objectives:
(i) The place should have recognisable routes, intersections and landmarks to
help people understand where they are and find their way around. New
buildings should respond to these cues.
(ii) Landmark places and buildings should be visible at street level.
(iii) Landmark places and buildings should be distinctive and memorable.
(iv) Public art and landmarks should help the public navigate.
(v) The scale of the buildings and the design of the street, its furniture, lighting
and surfaces should inform the public about the nature of the route.
(vi) Well-designed corners enhance legibility by creating visual interest and
contributing to a distinctive identity.
(vii) The legibility of an area can be improved through the detailing and quality
of materials in new development.
5/13

OFFICIAL
6. Adaptability - A place that can Change
Places should offer flexibility to support change over time. Places should create
continuity with the past and respond to emerging and future social,
environmental and economic needs.
Objectives:
(i) New development should have the capacity to meet changing social,
environmental and economic conditions.
(ii) New development should demonstrate the capacity to adapt rather than
be replaced.
(iii) New development should have the capacity to adapt to changing climate
patterns and demonstrate strategies for the conservation of non-renewable
resources including energy, water and materials, and for minimising waste
through construction and operation.
(iv) New development should have some capacity to adapt to changing
demographics, an ageing population, new uses and people with disabilities.
7. Diversity - A place with Variety and Choice
Successful places offer a variety of uses and activities. Choices in employment,
housing and services are important to making a place inclusive and welcoming.
Successful designs encourage use by as many people as possible from a variety
of backgrounds and must be accessible for people with disabilities.
New development should add interest, reflect the diversity of the local
community and respond positively to appropriate local building forms and
patterns of development.
Objectives:
(i) Places should incorporate a mix of uses that work together to create viable
environments that respond to the diversity of the local community and its
culture.
(ii) New development should offer a range of uses and activities that
contribute to the vitality of the place at different times of the day and
week.
(iii) Architectural expression should respond to positive local building forms
and patterns of development.
(iv) New development should be accessible and navigable by all people
regardless of physical ability.
6/13

OFFICIAL
(v) Landscape design should promote biodiversity and offer a variety of
habitats for flora and fauna.
(vi) Places should offer a choice of housing, shopping, employment and
entertainment.
Local Planning Policy – Document Control
Responsible Officer Previous Policy Title Next Review Date
Manager City Planning N/A (four years)
13 May 2030
Version Decision to Adopt/Amend Brief Details of Modifications
1 11 June 2013 OCM Adoption
2 27 July 2022 OCM: PC2207-7 Review
3 13 May 2026 OCM: C2605-7 Changing fees to reference the City’s Fees and
Charges
Public Consultation No
WAPC Approval Required? No Date approved by WAPC N/A
7/13

OFFICIAL
Annexure 1 - DAC Terms of Reference
Effective 1 July 2018
Statutory basis
The Design Advisory Committee is constituted in accordance with Schedule A Clause
78B(6) of the City of Fremantle Local Planning Scheme No 4. At all times the Committee
shall operate in accordance with the Scheme provisions.
Membership
The membership of the Committee shall be drawn from a pool of members and comprise
of 5 persons at any one sitting, with a minimum of 3 required to deliberate on any matter.
Members shall be highly regarded with appropriate qualifications and substantial
experience in Architecture and Urban Design. One member of the Committee shall be
selected with particular experience and expertise from each of the following areas;
• City centre planning and development
• Heritage and urban conservation
• Energy efficient building design and sustainable development
• Public space planning and development
The intent of the composition of the Committee is that it should include a mix of local and
non-local members. To ensure that local knowledge and issues are properly taken into
account, at least two of the members shall have practises based within, or demonstrate
significant experience in, the City of Fremantle.
The Chair of the Committee will be determined by the Committee Members and will
remain the same for the term of appointment of the member appointed as Chair despite
any rotation of members from the pool.
Other criteria for membership
Appointment of Members will be based on consideration of their qualifications and
experience which must include having been involved in the design and/or design review of
major development proposals of the kind which the Committee will be required to review
as part of its role. The term of office for Committee members will be as follows:
4 members including 1 deputy member – 4 years commencing 1 July 2018
3 members including 1 deputy member – 2 years commencing 1 July 2018
Thereafter, the term of office of all members will be 4 years from date of appointment.
8/13

OFFICIAL
A person who has completed a term of office commencing on or after 1 July 2018 may not
be appointed to serve a second consecutive term of office, but will be eligible to nominate
for appointment as a member after a period of at least two years from the end of their
previous term of office.
Committee members are appointed by the Chief Executive Officer following a public
process of expressions of interest. Any replies to expressions of interest will be considered
in the appointment process. In addition to the specific technical skills and experience
noted above selected members should enjoy considerable professional recognition and
prestige. To demonstrate this each nomination should be accompanied by the names of a
minimum of two professional referees and a curriculum vitae. These should be
independent professional peers who can specifically attest in writing to the suitability of
the candidate for membership the Committee.
The Chief Executive Officer may terminate the appointment of any member of the
Committee prior to the expiry of the term of office.
In the event that a member of the Committee resigns their membership, has their
appointment terminated, or is unable to continue to serve due to other unforeseen
circumstances prior to the expiry of their term of office, the Chief Executive Officer may
call for nominations for the appointment of a replacement member to serve for the
remainder of the original member’s term of office.
Role of the Committee
The role of the Design Advisory Committee is as follows
• To provide design advice to Council on all planning applications involving:
(a) any matter that relates to a planning policy relevant to the role of the Committee;
and
(b) any building 11.0m in height or greater in any zone other than the Residential or
Industrial zones as required by clause 11.8.6.2 of the scheme
• To provide design advice in other circumstances in relation to any major development
proposal required by the Council or Planning Services Committee, or any relevant Local
Planning Scheme amendment, Structure Plan or Local Planning Policy proposal.
Full committee reports in relation to referrals to the Committee will be provided to the
applicant and included in any reports to the Planning Services
Committee/Council/Development Assessment Panel.
9/13

OFFICIAL
Operation of the Committee – Advice on preliminary proposals
Applicants for Planning Approval for applications of the type that would be considered by
the Committee must consult with the Committee during the planning phase of their
development proposal (i.e. at least once before a formal planning application is lodged).
The decision to refer and timing of referral will be made by the Manager City Planning and
the Committee recommendation will be provided to applicants through Council staff.
Preliminary deliberations of the Committee on proposals will not be forwarded the Council
for discussion or ratification. Proponents and clients will be invited to attend the relevant
part of the Committee meeting, although the formal recommendation of the Committee
will be provided to the proponent by the Manager City Planning. Proponents and clients
are to focus their presentation on the following:
i. Streetscape Character Analysis;
ii. 3D streetscape perspective;
iii. Design matters raised in Local Planning Policy 1.9 - Design Advisory Committee
and Principles of Design;
iv. Client attendance strongly encouraged; and
v. CABE Alarm Bells (see below)
Some Alarm Bells
Extract from Design Review: how CABE evaluates quality in architecture and urban design
published by the Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment.
There are some common threads which can be drawn from those projects which CABE has
found reasons to criticise. Some of these problems areas are listed here:
• Lack of evidence of client commitment to a quality outcome
• Lack of evidence of clear, intelligent thinking in the design team
• Lack of a clear brief
• Contradictory aims and objectives
• Lack of viability: project may promise more than anyone believes they can
realistically deliver
• No evidence of understanding the nature of the site
• Adequate context analysis, but no evidence of it informing the design
• Project which appear mean, pinching, obstructive in their approach to the public
realm
• Lack of clarity about what is private and what is public
10/13

OFFICIAL
• Projects where it is hard to work out from the drawings what is actually proposed,
confusion on paper is likely to correspond to confusion in reality
• No effort to give clear and realistic illustrations of what the project will look like
• No effort to illustrate the project in context
• No effort to show an approach to landscape design where it is important.
Operation of the Committee – Advice on formal applications
All formal applications will be assessed by Council staff having regard to the provisions of
the Local Planning Scheme and Council Policies, prior to submission to the Committee.
The decision of the timing of referral, and the number of referrals considered necessary, to
the Committee shall be made at the discretion of the Manager City Planning in cases
where, in the opinion of the Manager City Planning, an application may be incapable of
approval, referral to the Design Advisory Committee may be denied.
Where the Committee is considering a formal statutory planning matter, its
recommendation will be discussed and assessed in the officer report to the Council on that
matter.
Applicants and clients will be invited to attend at the relevant part of the Committee
meeting, however all formal communication with the Committee will be:
through the:
1. Manager City Planning; or
2. Chair (or other Committee member nominated by the Chair) with the permission
and/or attendance of the Manager City Planning,
Members are strictly prohibited from individual communication with proponents or
interested persons on business before the Committee outside of the meeting structure
adopted by the Council. The Manager City Planning will determine when, and how often,
an item is presented to the Committee.
Recording of the meeting
A report will be prepared by the Committee Chair and will be provided to the applicant and
Council though the Planning Services Committee.
11/13

OFFICIAL
Role of the Chair
In addition to presiding at the meetings, the Chair will have the following additional
responsibilities,
• Ratification of meeting report.
• Preparation of a report on each item
• Liaison with Council staff over the operation of the Committee.
• Meeting with proponents with (or with the permission of) the Manager City Planning
to represent the Committee’s views.
• Attendance at Council, Standing Committee, Development Assessment Panel or
SAT meetings or briefings as necessary.
Frequency of meetings
Meetings will be held once a month or special meetings may be convened to deal with
specific issues.
The Committee shall be attended and provided with administrative support as necessary
by the Director Planning, Place and Urban Development, the Manager City Planning and
responsible officers.
Format for advice
The intent of the Committee is the provision of independent professional design advice on
key aspects of development. The summary design recommendations should be provided
having regard to the following:
DAC REPORT TEMPLATE
1. CABE DESIGN PRINCIPLES
a. Character
b. Continuity and Enclosure
c. Quality of Public Realm
d. Ease Of Movement
e. Legibility
f. Adaptability
g. Diversity
h. Overall Design Quality and Functionality
i. Appropriateness of Materials and Finishes
j. General Comments
12/13

OFFICIAL
2. DESIGN ASSESSMENT
a. What are the Strengths
b. How can the Proposal be Improved
3. RECOMMENDATION (select 1 or a combination of the below)
a. The design is supported;
b. The design is supported and is of sufficiently high quality to meet relevant scheme
provisions in relation to discretionary height;
c. The design is supported subject to the following conditions;
d. The design is not supported
e. As the design is at concept stage only, the plans have not progressed to a stage
where they can be recommended for support or not.
The Committee report will be considered as part of the officer report and recommendation
on the proposal and will be attached in full (on that particular item) to the report.
Fees
The members of the Committee will be paid sitting fees, on an hourly rate basis. The
amount will be determined by the Chief Executive Officer subject to overall budget
allocations determined by Council as part of the adoption of the annual budget. In
determining hourly fee rates the Chief Executive Officer shall have regard to advice from
the Office of the Government Architect of WA on fees for members of design review
bodies.
13/13