Local Planning
Policy 3.7
South Beach Village
fremantle.wa.gov.au

South Beach Village
Statutory background
The Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (the
Regulations) provide the ability for local governments to prepare a local planning policy on
any matter relevant to the planning scheme area. This policy may be cited as Local
Planning Policy 3.7 – South Beach Village (LPP3.7).
This policy should also be read in conjunction with Local Planning Scheme No. 4, the City’s
Local Planning Policies, and the Residential Design Codes of Western Australia.
Should an inconsistency between the policy and Scheme arise, the Scheme shall prevail.
Objectives
The policy objectives are:
• To ensure development design embodies a vibrant, modern, coastal character
reflecting the climate, varied style, and feel of Fremantle’s beaches.
• To promote building design and development that is compatible with the character of
South Fremantle.
• To provide a mix of building materials, colours and textures.
Application of this Policy
This policy is applicable to lots highlighted in orange in Figure 1 below:
Figure 1 – Policy Extent

Permitted Variations to the Residential Design Codes Volume 1
R-Codes Volume 1, Part B
1. Clause 5.1.2 – Street setback
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
C2.1 – C2.4
Deemed-to-comply
C2.1 Buildings, including carports, porches, balconies, verandahs, or equivalent, set
back from the primary and secondary street boundaries:
i. a minimum of 3 metres;
ii. reduced by up to 50% (1.5m) provided that the area of any building,
including a garage encroaching into the setback area, is compensated for by
at least an equal area of open space that is located between the street
setback line and a line drawn parallel to it at twice the setback distance
(refer Figure 2a and 2c of the R-Codes)
C2.2 Refer to C2.1 above.
C2.3 Buildings set back from the corner truncation boundary in accordance with C2.1
above.
C2.4 Refer to C2.1 above.
2. Clause 5.1.3 – Lot boundary setbacks
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
C3.1, C3.2
Deemed-to-comply
C3.1 Buildings which are set back in accordance with the following provisions, subject
to any additional measures in other elements of the R-Codes:
i. Lot 221 southern boundary: 3.5m minimum to the lower and upper floors
ii. Lot 237 northern boundary: 3.5m minimum to the lower and upper floors
iii. Lot 237 southern boundary: nil at ground floor and 1.5 minimum to the
upper floor
iv. Lot 237: Garage to be set back 1m from Dorre Lane
C3.2 Refer to C3.1 above.

3. Clause 5.1.4 - Open Space
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
C4
Deemed-to-comply
C4 Dwellings to provide 40% open space. Otherwise, open space is provided in
accordance with Table B of the R-Codes.
4. Clause 5.1.6 - Building Height
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
C6
Deemed-to-comply
C6 Building heights which comply with the following:
i. R20: 5.5m maximum external wall height. 8.5m maximum height to roof
ridge
ii. R30: 6m maximum external wall height. 9m maximum height to roof ridge
5. Clause 5.2.4 - Street Walls and Fences
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
C4.1, C4.2
Deemed-to-comply
C4.1 Front fences within the primary street setback area that do not exceed 1.2m
above natural ground level, measured from the primary street side of the front
fence and are at least 50% visually permeable.
C4.2 Solid pillars that form part of front fences not more than 1.2m above natural
ground level provided the horizontal dimension of the pillars is not greater than
400mm by 400mm and pillars are separated by visually permeable fencing in line
with C4.1.
6. Clause 5.3.1 - Outdoor Living Area
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
C1.1
Deemed-to-comply
C1.1 An outdoor living area is to be provided:
i. of a minimum 30 sqm for R20 sites and 32 sqm for R30 sites;
ii. behind the street setback area;
iii. directly accessible from the primary living space of the dwelling;
iv. with a minimum length and width dimension of 4m; and
v. with at least two-thirds of the required area without permanent roof cover.
(Refer Figure 13 of the R-Codes)

Policy Provisions
1. Elevations
Elevations are to be articulated on parts of the dwelling facing the streetscape and public
open space by staggering portions of the built form and /or varying construction materials.
Elevations must address the primary street and any adjacent public open space by way of
design, fenestration and clearly identifiable vertically articulated entry.
Passive surveillance must be ensured over primary and secondary streets and public open
space. This shall be achieved by the provision of major openings to these areas which
allow passive surveillance.
Dwellings on corner lots shall be designed to address both street frontages by way of
design, fenestration and clearly identifiable vertically articulated entry.
Windows and glazed surfaces as per Appendix 1.
2. Roof Design
Roofs are to have a maximum 33 degree pitch. Flat, curved or skillion roofs are to fit within
the deemed-to-comply building outline.
3. Building materials
Built form shall incorporate a blended mix of building materials, colours and textures to
create architectural interest.
Predominant building base colours are to be light, natural, earthy and synonymous with
the coastal landscape, or otherwise demonstrate an alternative design meets this intent.
Predominately masonry face brick wall construction will not be supported. Masonry will be
supported for highlights and features only.
Natural and /or reconstituted limestone blocks will be accepted in building design.

4. Carports and garages
Carports and garages shall be in accordance with the following development requirements
and locations identified in appendix one.
Garage doors must be a panel lift door of timber or steel with horizontal timber panel style.
Approved finishes for the driveway include the following:
• Masonry and clay paving. • Precast concrete pavers which are
• Liquid limestone. planed, honed or split faced.
• Exposed aggregate concrete finish.
• Coloured concrete & feature inserts.
5. Fencing
Fencing materials are to be of masonry, timber or steel, and can include pickets or horizontal
slats, brickwork or limestone. Wire or Colorbond fencing will not be supported.
Local Planning Policy – Document Control
Responsible Officer Previous Policy Title Next Review Date
Manager City Planning Local Planning Policy - Design (four years)
Guideline S6 - South Beach Village
Version Decision to Adopt/Amend Brief Details of Modifications
1 26 July 2006 Ordinary Council Meeting - PSC0707-115
2 23 March 2022 Ordinary Council Meeting - PC2203-12
3 8 April 2026 Ordinary Council Meeting – C2604-9 (previously DGS6)
Public Consultation Yes
WAPC Approval Required? No Date approved by WAPC N/A

Appendix 1 – Design Provisions