Advertisements Local Planning Policy
Responsible directorate: Planning and Community Development
Objective: • To provide guidance on the design and placement of advertisements located
within the City of Joondalup.
• To encourage advertisements that are well-designed, well-positioned and
appropriate to their location, and maintain the visual quality, amenity, and
character of the locality.
• To facilitate appropriate advertisements that are commensurate to the realistic
needs of business.
• To ensure the safe and efficient use of roads from which advertisements are
visible.
• To ensure advertisements are clear and efficient in communicating to the public
and do not lead to visual clutter on and around buildings and within streetscapes
and localities.
1. Authority:
This policy has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2 of the deemed provisions
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 which allows the
local government to prepare local planning policies relating to planning and development within
the Scheme area.
Clause 61(h) of the deemed provisions of the Planning and Development (Local Planning
Schemes) Regulations 2015 identifies that development approval is not required for:
h. the erection or installation of a sign of a class specified in a local planning policy or local
development plan that applies in respect of the sign unless the sign is to be erected or
installed:
i. on a place included on a heritage list prepared in accordance with this Scheme; or
ii. on land located within an area designated under this Scheme as a heritage area.
Advertisements 1

This policy specifies the various classes of signs for which development approval is not required;
in line with clause 61(1)(h)(i) and (ii) the exemptions set out in this policy are not applicable to
heritage places and areas.
2. Application:
This policy revokes the City of Joondalup Signs Local Planning Policy.
This policy applies to advertisements, including signs and other devices, located throughout the
City of Joondalup.
The policy is to be read in conjunction with the City of Joondalup Local Planning Scheme No 3
(the scheme) and any relevant agreed structure plan. The provisions of agreed structure plans
shall prevail over this policy to the extent of any inconsistency.
3. Definitions:
The Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 includes the
following definition which is applicable to all advertising signs and devices:
“advertisement” means any word, letter, model, sign, placard, board, notice, device or
representation, whether illuminated or not, that is used wholly or partly for the purposes of
advertising, announcing or directing, and includes:
a. any hoarding or similar structure used, or adapted for use, for the display of
advertisements;
b. any airborne device anchored to any land or building used for the display of advertising;
and
c. any vehicle or trailer or other similar object placed or located so as to serve the purpose of
displaying advertising.
Additional terms used in this policy are:
“business premises” means a green title or strata title lot, or a tenancy that comprises the
physical location of a business operation.
“façade” means the external face of a constructed building viewed from a single elevation,
comprising solid walls and including windows and enclosures to verandahs and balconies.
“pedestrian access” means a continuous accessible path of travel as defined by Australian
Standard AS1428.1 Design for Access and Mobility, having a minimum width of one metre with
no obstructions or intrusions, including signs and advertisements, on the minimum width.
“signage strategy” means an overall plan for the whole of the development site or area,
showing the location, type, size and design of all existing and proposed signs, as well as the
outline of any buildings, landscaping, car parking areas, vehicular access points etc.
Sign typologies referred to in this policy are defined in Schedule 1.
Advertisements 2

4. Statement:
Appropriate advertising in the City of Joondalup provides benefit to local business and the
community, whilst maintaining the amenity and safety of places, thoroughfares, and localities.
Advertisements are an important communication tool between local businesses and potential
customers. To serve their function, the design, quality, and placement of signs should be fit-for-
purpose and facilitate effective visual communication that meets the needs of business and are
suitable for their audience and context. Clarity of messaging for advertising is important and can
be impacted by overwhelming visual environments as a result of proliferation of advertising signs
and devices. The City has an expectation that advertisements are appropriate to their context,
commensurate to the realistic needs of business, and integrate with the visual context of high
amenity areas.
This policy operates to support business need for productive visibility whilst balancing the
potential amenity and safety impacts of advertisements, taking into consideration the varied
commercial functions and desired levels of visual amenity across varied localities of the City.
The policy provides guidance on the extent and location of various forms of advertisements.
A sign may not be attached or erected on a property within the City unless all necessary
approvals have been obtained in accordance with the scheme, local law and the provisions of
this policy. Signs that are exempt from the requirement for development approval are listed in
this policy.
5. Details:
5.1. Locality types and objectives:
a. Table 1 establishes specific localities and associated objectives as the basis for
acceptable advertisements and the policy standards to be applied across the various
zones of the scheme.
Table 1. Locality types and objectives
Locality type Locality objective Applicable zones
Neighbourhood Neighbourhood localities • Joondalup Activity Centre:
localities have a residential function.  Lakeside Residential
Advertising should be precinct
unobtrusive, reflecting the • Residential Zone
strong residential amenity of
• Rural Zone
these areas.
Activity centre These are high amenity areas • Joondalup Activity Centre:
localities that support a range of  City Centre precinct
residential, retail and  Learning and Innovation
community purposes. Whilst precinct
advertising is a necessary  Health and Wellness
part of commercial activity in precinct
these localities, a high
• Commercial zone
standard of amenity requires
• Centre zone
that signs complement their
• Mixed Use zone
mixed use and residential
• Private Community
surrounds and are of a scale
Purpose zone
that improves pedestrian
amenity and interest.
Advertisements 3

Locality type Locality objective Applicable zones
Service Service commercial localities • Joondalup Activity Centre;
commercial support a core commercial  Joondalup Edge precinct
localities and business function. Whilst  Joondalup West precinct
recognising the need for • Service Commercial Zone
companies to advertise their
• Light Industry Zone
goods and services,
advertising should be
effective, with messaging not
compromised by proliferation
of advertisements.
5.2. Neighbourhood localities:
5.2.1. Development approval not required:
a. Development approval is not required within neighbourhood localities for the
advertisements listed in Table 2, where they:
• are located on private land;
• only advertise goods or services that relate to the land use of the site;
and
• do not include any illumination or radio; animation or movement;
reflective; retro-reflective or fluorescent materials in their design or
structure.
b. If the conditions specified in Table 2 are not met, development approval will be
required.
Table 2. Signs for which development approval is not required in
neighbourhood localities
Sign type Conditions
Monolith signs used • Maximum width 1 metre
for the purpose of a • Maximum sign height 2 metres
display home sign • Located at least 15 metres from the intersecting
point of corner truncations.
• Located to not impede vehicle sightlines within
the lot for access to and from the property
Wall sign • Maximum of 1 per business premises.
• 1.2 square metres for a non-residential building
• 0.2 square metres for a residential dwelling
• Does not extend beyond the top or any side of
the wall
• Does not obscure architectural details
5.2.2. Prohibited signs:
a. All other signs are considered inconsistent with the objectives of
neighbourhood localities and are not permitted, including:
• Semaphore signs
Advertisements 4

• Verandah signs
• Window signs
• Banner signs
• Roof signs
• Portable signs
• Freestanding banner signs
• Pylon signs
• Inflatable signs
• Portable illuminated variable message sign, unless erected by or on
behalf of a public utility or authority or for the purpose of temporary traffic
management purposes for a period of less than 48 hours in any
12-month period or for the period outlined in a Traffic Management Plan
approved by the City, or for use by not-for-profit organisations to promote
significant community events.
5.3. Activity centre localities:
5.3.1. Development approval not required:
a. Development approval is not required within activity centre localities for the
advertisements listed in Table 3, where they:
• are located on private land;
• only advertise goods or services that relate to the land use of the site;
and
• do not include any LED or digital illumination; radio; animation or
movement; reflective; retro-reflective or fluorescent materials in their
design or structure.
b. If the conditions specified in Table 3 are not met, development approval will be
required.
Table 3. Signs for which development approval is not required in activity
centre localities
Sign type Conditions
Semaphore sign • Maximum of 1 per business premises
• Maximum height 1.5 metres
• Maximum width 1.5 metres
• Minimum clearance 2.75 metres
Advertisements 5

Sign type Conditions
Verandah sign • Maximum of 1 per business premises
• Maximum height 0.4 metres
• Maximum width 2.4 metres
• Minimum clearance 2.75 metres
• Does not extend above or beyond the width of the
fascia, verandah, awning, or balcony
• Not located within 2 metres of another such sign on
the fascia of the same verandah.
Window and • In aggregate, to a maximum of 25% of the façade
wall signs • Wall signs are to:
 be contained within signage panels within the
building façade, if provided;
 not extend beyond the top or any side of the wall;
and
 not obscure architectural details.
• Window signs are to be:
 Maximum of 20% of the glazing
Portable sign • Maximum of one portable sign per business premises,
if there is no other free standing sign of any type
erected on any street frontage that advertises the
subject business.
• Maximum dimension of 1 metre, and maximum area
of 1 square metre.
• Has a maximum of 2 facing sides.
• Is secured so as not to be moveable by wind or
natural forces.
• It is not obstructing any vehicle accessway.
• It maintains pedestrian access to and within the
property.
Banner sign • Maximum of 1 per business premises
• Maximum height 1 metres.
• Maximum width 4 metres.
• Displayed for a maximum period of 21 days at a time,
at no less than 3 monthly intervals .
• To be removed within 24 hours following the event or
offer.
• To be securely fixed to a building or pole of sufficient
size and strength to support the banner under all
conditions.
• To be erected within the boundaries of the lot and not
to project beyond any lot boundary.
• Do not impede vehicle sightlines for access to and
from the property.
• It maintains pedestrian access to and within the
property.
• A formal request is received, and a letter is issued
from the City approving the temporary nature of the
freestanding banner sign, and its period of use.
Advertisements 6

Sign type Conditions
Freestanding • Maximum of 2 per street frontage of the business
banner sign premises.
• Maximum height 5 metres.
• Maximum width 1.2 metre.
• Displayed for a maximum period of 21 days at a time,
at no less than 3 monthly intervals.
• To be removed within 24 hours following the event or
offer.
• To be securely fixed to a building or pole of sufficient
size and strength to support the banner under all
conditions.
• To be erected within the boundaries of the lot and not
to project beyond any lot boundary.
• Do not impede vehicle sightlines for access to and
from the property.
• It maintains pedestrian access to and within the
property.
• A formal request is received and a letter is issued
from the City approving the temporary nature of the
freestanding banner sign, and its period of use.
5.3.2. Development approval required:
a. Development approval is required for advertisements listed in Table 4 within
activity centre localities.
b. All advertisements listed in Table 4 shall only advertise goods or services that
relate to the land use of the site.
c. Where an advertisement does not comply with the standards specified in Table
4, the applicant will be required to submit written justification for the
noncompliance.
Advertisements 7

Table 4. Signs for which development approval is required in activity
centre localities
Sign type Development standards
Freestanding • A maximum of one free standing sign per Green Title
signs (including lot per street frontage
pylon signs, • Single-tenancy pylon sign*:
monolith signs,  Maximum area 6 square metres.
and hoarding  Maximum area height 6 metres.
signs)
• Multi-tenancy pylon sign*:
 Maximum area 12 square metres.
 Maximum height 8 metres.
• Minimum clearance 2.75 metres.
• Monolith sign*:
 Maximum height 6 metres.
 Maximum width 2 metres.
• Hoarding sign:
 Maximum width 3 metres.
 Maximum sign height 2.5 metres.
 Maximum support/post height 1.2 metres.
• Located at least 15 metres from the intersecting point
of corner truncations.
• Located so as to not impede vehicle sightlines within
the lot for access to and from the property.
• Located so as to maintain pedestrian access to and
within the property.
• Where there are multiple tenancies, all signs are
incorporated into 1 composite sign.
• Any fixed variable message elements are to comply
with relevant standards and design principles in
section 5.5 and 5.6.
*Pylon and monolith signs are not permitted within the
City Centre JACP, except along the eastern side of
Joondalup Drive between Shenton Avenue and Collier
Pass, and the southern side of Shenton Avenue
between Joondalup Drive and McLarty Avenue
Advertisements 8

Sign type Development standards
Roof sign • Located within the City Centre precinct of the
Joondalup Activity Centre only.
• Must achieve a high degree of integration and
compatibility with the form of the building that it is
attached to.
• To appear as if it is part of the original building, or
otherwise match or complement its architecture.
• Maximum vertical dimension equal to one tenth of the
building’s height, but not more than the combined
height of two typical floors of the building.
• Only one roof sign or one wall sign at the top of the
building shall be permitted per building elevation.
• The illumination of roof signs on buildings is
encouraged in locations where it will add interest and
vibrancy to the city’s night skyline and will not
adversely affect the amenity of occupants of nearby
buildings.
• To display business or building name and logo only,
and not include any other advertising content.
All other • To comply with 5.5 and 5.6.
advertisements
not listed in
5.3.1 or 5.3.3
5.3.3. Prohibited signs:
a. Signs considered inconsistent with the objectives of activity centre localities
and are not permitted are:
• Small portable signs that are not consistent with the conditions specified
in 5.3.2, Table 3
• Inflatable signs
• Roof signs located in any area outside of the City Centre precinct of the
Joondalup Activity Centre.
• Portable illuminated variable message sign, unless erected by or on
behalf of a public utility or authority or for the purpose of temporary traffic
management purposes for a period of less than 48 hours in any
12-month period or for the period outlined in a Traffic Management Plan
approved by the City, or for use by not-for-profit organisations to promote
significant community events.
5.4. Service commercial localities:
5.4.1. Development approval not required:
a. Development approval is not required within service commercial localities for
advertisements listed in Table 5, where they:
• are located on private land;
Advertisements 9

• only advertise goods or services that relate to the land use of the site;
and
• do not include any LED or digital illumination; radio; animation or
movement; reflective; retro-reflective or fluorescent materials in their
design or structure.
b. If the conditions specified in Table 5 are not met, development approval will be
required.
Table 5. Signs for which development approval is not required in service
commercial localities
Sign type Conditions
Semaphore sign • Maximum of 1 per business premises.
• Maximum height 3 metres.
• Maximum width 1.5 metres.
• Minimum clearance 2.75 metres.
Verandah sign • Maximum of 1 per business premises.
• Maximum height 1 metre.
• Maximum width 3 metres.
• Minimum clearance 2.75 metres.
• Does not extend above or beyond the width of the
fascia, verandah, awning, or balcony
• Not located within 2 metres. of another such sign on
the fascia of the same verandah
Window and • In aggregate, to a maximum of 25% of the façade
wall signs • Wall signs are to:
 be contained within signage panels within the
building façade, if provided;
 not extend beyond the top or any side of the wall;
and
 not obscure architectural details.
• Window signs are to be:
 Maximum of 25% of the glazing.
Portable sign • Maximum of one portable sign per business premises
• Maximum dimension of 1 metre, and maximum area
of 1 square metres.
• Has a maximum of 2 facing sides.
• Is secured so as not to be moveable by wind or
natural forces.
• It is not obstructing any vehicle accessway.
• It maintains pedestrian access to and within the
property.
Advertisements 10

Sign type Conditions
Banner sign • Maximum of 1 per business premises
• Maximum height 1 metre.
• Maximum width 4 metres.
• Displayed for a maximum period of 21 days at a time,
at no less than 3 monthly intervals.
• To be removed within 24 hours following the event or
offer.
• To be securely fixed to a building or pole of sufficient
size and strength to support the banner under all
conditions.
• To be erected within the boundaries of the lot and not
to project beyond any lot boundary.
• Do not impede vehicle sightlines for access to and
from the property.
• It maintains pedestrian access to and within the
property.
• A formal request is received, and a letter is issued
from the City approving the temporary nature of the
banner sign, and its period of use.
Freestanding • Maximum of 2 per street frontage of the business
banner sign premises
• Maximum height 5 metres.
• Maximum width 1.2 metres.
• Displayed for a maximum period of 21 days at a time,
at no less than 3 monthly intervals.
• To be removed within 24 hours following the event or
offer.
• To be securely fixed to a building or pole of sufficient
size and strength to support the banner under all
conditions.
• To be erected within the boundaries of the lot and not
to project beyond any lot boundary.
• Do not impede vehicle sightlines for access to and
from the property.
• It maintains pedestrian access to and within the
property.
• A formal request is received, and a letter is issued
from the City approving the temporary nature of the
freestanding banner sign, and its period of use.
5.4.2. Development approval required:
a. Development approval is required for advertisements within service
commercial localities listed in Table 6.
b. All advertisements listed in Table 6 shall only advertise goods or services that
relate to the land use of the site.
c. Where an advertisement does not comply with the standards specified in
Table 6, the applicant will be required to submit written justification for the non-
compliance.
Advertisements 11

Table 6. Signs for which development approval is required in service
commercial localities
Sign type Standards
Freestanding • A maximum of one free standing sign per Green Title
signs lot per street frontage
• Single-tenancy pylon sign:
(Including pylon  Maximum area 6 square metres.
signs, monolith  Maximum height 6 metres.
signs, and
• Multi-tenancy pylon sign:
hoarding signs)
 Maximum area 12 square metres.
 Maximum height 8 metres.
 Minimum clearance 2.75 metres.
• Monolith sign:
 Maximum height 6 metres.
 Maximum width 2 metres.
• Hoarding sign:
 Maximum width 3 metres.
 Maximum sign height 2.5 metres.
 Maximum support/post height 1.2 metres.
 Not affixed to boundary wall or fence.
• Located at least 15 metres from the intersecting point
of corner truncations.
• Located so as to not impede vehicle sightlines within
the lot for access to and from the property.
• Located so as to maintain pedestrian access to and
within the property.
• Where there are multiple tenancies, all signs are
incorporated into 1 composite sign.
• Any fixed variable message elements are to comply
with relevant standards and design principles in
section 5.5 and 5.6.
Inflatable signs • Maximum 7 metres diameter.
• Maximum 9 metres height above roof ridge.
• Displayed for a maximum period of 14 days at a time,
at no less than 3 monthly intervals.
• To be covered by General Liability Insurance, a copy
of which is to be provided to the City.
All other • To be considered against 5.5 and 5.6
advertisements
not listed in
5.4.1 or 5.4.3
5.4.3. Prohibited signs:
a. Signs considered inconsistent with the objectives of service commercial
localities and are not permitted are:
• Small portable signs that are not consistent with the conditions specified
in 5.4.2, Table 6
• Roof signs
Advertisements 12

• Portable illuminated variable message sign, unless erected by or on
behalf of a public utility or authority or for the purpose of temporary traffic
management purposes for a period of less than 48 hours in any
12-month period or for the period outlined in a Traffic Management Plan
approved by the City, or for use by not-for-profit organisations to promote
significant community events
5.5. Design principles:
a. The following design principles relate to all signs located within the City and will be
considered as part of the assessment of an application for development approval.
Advertising signs and devices should:
i. maintain and complement the amenity of the locality within which they are
sited, being compatible with the style, scale and character of the surrounding
streetscape, and the predominant uses within the locality;
ii. be sited and designed so as to ensure that any illumination, animation,
movement, digital signage technology and/or changing context of the material
displayed on the sign does not present light spill or any other detrimental
impact on the amenity of neighbouring properties or the locality;
iii. be located on land to which they relate and only advertise goods or services
that relate to the land use of the site;
iv. be commensurate with the realistic commercial need for such advertising, and
not be superfluous or unnecessary by virtue of colours, height, prominence,
visual impact, size, relevance to the premises on which they are located,
number and content;
v. be contained within the boundary of the lot on which they are situated and not
located within a road reserve;
vi. maintain visual and physical access to or from any door, window or fire
escape;
vii. achieve a high level of design quality and be comprised of durable materials
that fit their purpose;
viii. be compatible in scale and integrated with the architectural design of the
building on which they are erected or adjacent to, having regard to the form,
materials, finishes, colours and fenestration of the building(s);
ix. utilise appropriately placed external lights that illuminate the whole or part of a
building façade (including signs);
x. not contain any obscene or vulgar material;
xi. be located and designed so as to not present a hazard or be misleading to
vehicles or pedestrians, maintaining visual sightlines required for safe vehicular
access to and from properties;
xii. be located and designed so as to not cause confusion with, or reduce the
effectiveness of traffic control devices; and
Advertisements 13

xiii. include legible address information to assist with customer wayfinding.
5.6. Illuminated, variable and animated content signs:
5.6.1. Illuminated signs:
a. Illuminated signage is not considered appropriate within neighbourhood
localities.
b. Variable and animated content signs are to use low level illumination and be
adjusted so the brightness levels do not exceed those of static signs in typical
ambient light conditions, especially after dusk.
c. The illumination of signs must comply with relevant Australian Standards
(including AS 4282-1997) and any other relevant standards and guidelines
(eg maximum luminance levels) considered appropriate by the local
government.
5.6.2. Fixed variable content signs:
a. The City will consider that any visually unobstructed sign facing a public road
within the stopping sight distance from the road edge as specified in Table 7 is
visible from that public road.
Table 7. Distance from road edge where the City will consider a sign is
visible from a public road
Speed limit Distance
≤50 kilometres/hour 45 metres
60 kilometres/hour 65 metres
70 kilometres/hour 85 metres
80 kilometres/hour 110 metres
90 kilometres/hour 140 metres
100 kilometres/hour 170 metres
b. Signs that are visible from public roads shall not include any animated,
flashing, pulsing or chasing content.
c. A road safety audit report will be required to be submitted as part of a
development application for a sign with variable content that is visible from
public roads with a posted speed limit greater than 50 kilometres/hour. This
report is to demonstrate compliance with the general safety and efficiency
criteria for roadside advertising devices as specified in Main Roads Western
Australia’s Policy and Application Guidelines for Advertising Signs Within and
Beyond State Road Reserves (as amended).
d. Signs that are visible from public roads shall be limited to permanently static
displays where:
i. the immediate location has a number of accidents which qualifies it as a
state or federal black spot location (see note below);
ii. it is located within a device restriction area (see Note below) and
presents potential to distract a driver at a critical time (high demand,
decision making areas);
Advertisements 14

iii. it is in an area where there are several devices and the cumulative
effective of those devices may be potentially hazardous or distracting; or
iv. it will in any way:
• interfere with the effectiveness of traffic control devices,
• obscure a driver’s view, or
• imitate a traffic control device.
Notes:
The City can be contacted to confirm if a location has a number of accidents
which would quality it as a state or federal black spot location.
The City will determine device restriction areas for advertising devices visible
from local roads according to the methodology set out in Main Roads Western
Australia Policy and Application Guidelines for Advertising Signs Within and
Beyond State Road Reserves (as amended). An excerpt from Main Roads
Western Australia Policy and Application Guidelines for Advertising Signs
Within and Beyond State Road Reserves that illustrates device restriction
areas is provided in Schedule 3.
e. Variable message signs that are visible from public roads shall:
• have a dwell duration of not less than that specified in Table 8;
• have a duration of transition between the full display of one message and
the full display of the next message shall not exceed 0.1 seconds;
• not include transitional effects which fly-in, slide, checker-box, flash,
pulsate or chase;
• limit the amount of wording/text displayed at any one time so there is no
sequencing or successive messages that extend the time taken to read
the display;
• not include any content that could be perceived to be providing public
safety instructions to road users;
• not include fluorescent, reflective or retro reflective colours; and
• conform to the guidelines set out in Austroads’ Guide to Traffic
Management Part 10: Transport Control — Types of Devices with
respect to letter size and legibility of text.
Advertisements 15

Table 8. Minimum dwell durations for variable message signs visible from
public roads
Speed limit Dwell time
≤50 kilometres/hour 45 seconds
60 kilometres/hour 40 seconds
70 kilometres/hour 35 seconds
80 kilometres/hour 30 seconds
90 kilometres/hour 25 seconds
f. Signs with variable content shall have a default setting that will display a dark,
blank screen/sign face (except during repair) if a malfunction occurs.
5.6.3. Animated content signs:
a. Animated content signs shall:
• face or be within a public space;
• have a viewing area designed and intended for pedestrians to linger for
an extended period of time;
• be oriented for viewing within the public space and not from adjacent
streets;
• not be visible from public roads;
• enhance the visual quality of the public space;
• be compatible with the desired character of the public space and
enhance its activation;
• be secure from content tampering; and
• have a default setting that will display a dark, blank screen/sign face
(except during repair) if a malfunction occurs.
5.7. Other signs for which development approval is not required:
a. An application for development approval is not required to be made to the City of
Joondalup where the sign complies with the following exemptions:
i. A sign erected or maintained in accordance with an Act.
ii. A temporary hoarding sign used for the purposes of a property disposal sign or
builders/construction sign with a maximum width of 2 metres, maximum sign
height of 1 metre, and maximum post height of 1.2 metres, to be removed
within 10 days of closure or sale of the property, or completion of building
works.
iii. A plate not exceeding 0.2 square metres in area erected or affixed on the
street alignment or between that alignment and the building line to indicate the
name and occupation or profession of the occupier of the premises.
iv. A direction sign.
Advertisements 16

v. A sign used solely for the direction and control of people, animals or vehicles
or to indicate the name or street number of a premises, if the area of the sign
does not exceed 0.2 square metres.
vi. A sign within a building, unless:
• it is clearly visible from a public place outside the building;
• it is exempted under any other paragraph of this section; or
• it is considered objectionable by the local government.
vii. A sign not larger than 0.6 metres x 0.9 metres on an advertising pillar or panel
approved by or with the consent of the local government for the purpose of
displaying public notices for information.
viii. A building name sign on any building, where it is of a single line of letters not
exceeding 300 millimetres in height, fixed to the facade of the building.
ix. Newspaper or magazine posters, provided they are displayed against the
outside wall of the business premises from which the newspapers or
magazines are sold.
x. A rural producer’s sign which is the only sign on the lot on which it is erected.
xi. A sign erected by the local government, or with the approval of the local
government, on land under the care, control and management of the local
government.
xii. A sign erected and maintained on street furniture, bus shelters or seats in
accordance with the terms and conditions of a contract between the local
government and the company responsible for those signs.
xiii. A maximum of 4 garage sale signs, each not greater than 0.25 square metres,
advertising the sale of second-hand domestic goods in domestic quantities, not
being part of a business, trade or profession and only being displayed on the
day of the sale and on no more than 2 occasions for the same lot in each
6 month period.
xiv. A sign painted on a kerb, adjacent to a property depicting the house number
and in accordance with specifications approved by the local government.
xv. A sign erected by the local government for the purpose of:
• encouraging participation in voting (but not in favour of any candidate,
political party, group or thing) at a local government election, provided
that the signs are erected no more than 5 weeks prior to the election; or
• indicating the name and location of a polling place for an election.
b. The advertising devices exempted in (a) above exclude signs which contain any
illumination or radio; animation or movement in its design or structure; reflective;
retroreflective or fluorescent materials in its design or structure.
Advertisements 17

5.8. Temporary use of portable illuminated variable message boards:
a. The temporary use of a portable illuminated variable message board in service
commercial localities for a period of up to 14 days once per year may be agreed
through application of clause 61(1)(f) of the deemed provisions of the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015, where:
i. there is a maximum of one (1) per green title lot at any one time;
ii. it is operated so as to not cause nuisance by way of light spill to neighbouring
properties;
iii. it is removed within 24 hours following the event or offer;
iv. it is located within the boundaries of the lot;
v. it is positioned so that it does not occupy more than one (1) car parking bay;
vi. it is located outside of any area required for vehicle manoeuvring, or visual
sightlines;
vii. it does not impede pedestrian access to and from the property;
viii. it does not contain any pictorial displays, symbols, colours or text that appears
to replicate any regulatory or warning traffic control sign or device, including
traffic signals;
ix. it does not create visual conflict with traffic signals (foreground or background)
or temporary roadwork signage;
x. it will not unduly distract drivers due to its display, location, content, movement
or rotation, frequency or flashing, brightness or luminance;
xi. where it can be viewed from a public road, the letter size and legibility of
conforms to the guidelines set out in Austroads’ Guide to Traffic Management
Part 10: Transport Control — Types of Devices; and
xii. a formal request is received, and a letter is issued from the City approving the
temporary nature of the portable illuminated variable message board, and its
period of use.
Note: Clause 5.8 (a)(xii) above does not apply if the portable illuminated variable
message board is in place for less than 48 hours in any 12-month period.
5.9. Supporting information:
a. A signage strategy will be required to be submitted with any application for
development approval for:
• new buildings and additions creating multiple tenancies are proposed; and
• signs that do not comply with the standards specified in this policy, or for which
standards are not provided by this policy.
b. The strategy should explain and demonstrate the need for the extent and design of
signs proposed, having regard to the objectives and design principles of this policy
Advertisements 18

and should seek to integrate the signage with the building design, particularly
through the provision of signage panels within the building façades.
c. Once approved, all subsequent sign applications will be assessed against previously
approved signage strategies. Modifications to the signage strategy to permit
additional signage will be subject to a further approval and will need to be further
justified.
Creation date: March 2021 (CJ037-03/21)
Formerly: Signs Policy
Amendments: CJ037-03/21
Last reviewed: March 2021 (CJ037-03/21)
Related documentation: • Guide to Traffic Management Part 10: Transport Control — Types
of Devices (Austroads)
• Local Government and Public Property Local Law 2014
• Local Planning Scheme No 3
• Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
• Policy and Application Guidelines for Advertising Signs Within and
Beyond State Road Reserves (Main Roads Western Australia)
File reference: 109502
Advertisements 19

Schedule 1. Sign typologies
Type of sign
Banner sign
A banner sign is a temporary sign normally made of a
lightweight, non-rigid material, such as fabric, canvas or cloth
attached to a part of a building and is generally used to
promote a particular event.
Bunting
A bunting is an advertising device that is made from strips of
material used for decorative purposes or to highlight a
location.
Freestanding banner sign
A freestanding banner sign is an advertising device made
from lightweight material attached to a pole weighted to the
ground. Freestanding banner signs come in a variety of
shapes and may be referred to as “Bali”, “Teardrop”, “Blade”
or “Wing” signs.
Hoarding sign
A sign which is affixed to a fence or structure having one or
more supports, other than a pylon sign,. Typically, a hoarding
sign’s horizontal dimension is greater than its vertical
dimension. Hoarding signs may include property disposal
signs, builders signs, display home signs and estate signs.
Portable illuminated variable message board sign
A variable message board (VMB) sign mounted on a trailer
that can be altered to make various words and messages
which may constantly change. Does not include small
variable message panels included in pylon or monolith signs
(eg service station price point panels).
Advertisements 20

Type of sign
Inflatable sign
An inflatable sign is a sign that is painted, stencilled or
attached to an inflatable device such as a balloon, and
includes the inflatable device itself.
Monolith sign
A monolith sign is in-filled from ground level to the top of the
sign and appears as a solid structure where the supporting
columns cannot be seen.
Portable sign
A portable sign is not permanently attached to a building,
structure, fence or the ground. Portable signs include
“A-frame” and “sandwich board” signs.
Pylon sign
A pylon sign means a sign supported on one or more poles
and not attached to a building and includes a detached sign
framework, supported on one or more poles to which sign
infills may be added.
Roof sign
A roof sign is a sign that is erected or painted directly on the
roof of a building or attached to the top of a parapet wall of a
building.
Advertisements 21

Type of sign
Semaphore sign
A semaphore sign is a sign that is affixed to a building or
structure at or by one of its ends
Verandah sign
A verandah sign is a sign affixed on, above or under a
verandah and includes a sign that is affixed to cantilevered
awnings and balconies.
Wall sign
A wall sign is a sign attached to or painted directly onto the
external face of a building. A wall sign includes a sign located
on support pillars and columns, parapets and fascia.
Window sign
A window sign is a sign painted or affixed to either the interior
or exterior surface of the glazed area of a window.
Advertisements 22

Schedule 2. Measuring signs
In determining the size of a sign, the measurements are taken as the greatest horizontal dimension
(width) multiplied by the greatest vertical dimension (height), excluding any support structures (see
Figure 1 for example). Clearance is measured from the finished ground level to the sign directly
above.
Figure 1. Example of measurements for signage
Advertisements 23

Schedule 3. Excerpt from Appendix A — Device Restriction Areas of Main Roads Western
Australia Policy and Application Guidelines for Advertising Signs Within and Beyond State
Road Reserves
Advertisements 24