POLICY DC 4.2
PLANNING FOR HAZARDS AND SAFETY
BACKGROUND NOTES
Planning for hazardous industry has become an increasingly
important facet of land use planning in recent years.
Overseas catastrophes have heightened public awareness of
the hazards associated with some industry and activities.
The Government of Western Australia has responded by
developing a more informed approach to hazardous
industry siting and has established controls and standards, in
consultation with the public of Western Australia (EPA
Bulletin 278).
In recognition of the importance, yet complexity, of
hazardous industry planning, the Australian Planning
Ministers established a National Task Force into Hazardous
Industry and Safety Planning in 1986. This Task Force has
been chaired by the NSW Department of Planning, which is
a recognised leader in this area. Policies and Guidelines in
areas related to hazardous industry planning have been
developed in NSW and these have been considered in the
development of this policy.
In addition there is a need to provide guidance in other land
use planning matters where there is a real, or perceived,
level of risk. These include storage and transport of
dangerous goods, planning for contaminated land, and the
need to carefully plan areas prone to bushfires and coastal
areas prone to storm surge and severe shoreline movement.
This policy seeks to provide guidance to planners, local
authorities and developers in planning to prevent the
occurrence of potentially hazardous events and to mitigate
the effects of any such events, should they occur and in
ensuring that the appropriate procedures are followed in
the consideration of proposals.
Other relevant policies contained in the Development
Control (including subdivision) Policy Manual include;
DC 3.4 Rural Land Use Planning Policy
DC 4.1 Industrial Subdivision
DC 6.1 Country Coastal Planning Policy
Guidelines - Planning for Better Bushfire Protection.
Adopted June 1991.

POLICY DC 4.2
PLANNING FOR HAZARDS AND SAFETY
CONTENTS:
1. INTRODUCTION
2. DEFINITIONS FOR THE PURPOSE OF THIS
POLICY
3. OBJECTIVES
4. GENERAL POLICIES FOR HAZARDOUS
DEVELOPMENT
4.1 General State Planning Commission policy for
hazardous development
4.2 Procedural guidelines
5. HAZARDOUS INDUSTRY
5. 1 State Planning Commission policy on
hazardous industry
5.2 Procedural guidelines
6. STORAGE OF DANGEROUS GOODS
6.1 State Planning Commission policy on storage of
dangerous goods
6.2 Procedural guidelines
7. TRANSPORTATION OF DANGEROUS GOODS
7.1 State Planning Commission policy on
transportation of dangerous goods
7.2 Procedural guidelines
8. NON-HAZARDOUS DEVELOPMENT IN OR
ADJACENT TO HAZARDOUS LOCATIONS
8.1 State Planning Commission policy on planning
near hazardous locations
8.2 State Planning Commission policy on planning
for natural events
9. PLANNING FOR CONTAMINATED LAND
9.1 State Planning Commission policy on
contaminated land
9.2 Procedural guidelines

1. INTRODUCTION Goods) Order 1988 pursuant to Section 42 (2) (b) of the
Explosives and Dangerous Goods Act 1961 of a sufficient
1. 1. No "risk" is defined as the likelihood of any unwanted quantity to require a premises to be placarded under that
consequences. The basis for determining the Act.
acceptability of risk relates to standards or guidelines.
Risk means the likelihood of any unwanted
1.2. Various levels of risks are tolerated on a daily basis. consequences such as death, injury, damage to
Risk taken with free choice and full knowledge may be property or damage to the environment.
described as voluntary risk. Where the individual does
not have knowledge of the risks or is not entirely free Hazard means a set of conditions that has the
to choose to avoid the risk exposure, then the risk may potential to cause such unwanted consequences.
be termed non-voluntary. While people may be
prepared to expose themselves to quite high levels of Individual Riskmeans the likelihood that a person
risk in undertaking certain activities (such as playing will die or will he injured.
sports or driving cars), involuntarily imposed risks (such
as that arising from a hazardous industrial Risk Analysis refers to the quantified risk analysis
development) generally are only acceptable to society required by the EPA at an early stage of the
at quite low levels of risk. environmental impact assessment process where a
project involves a significant element of risk. The
1.3. When a risk is to be imposed on an individual or group analysis should include identification of the relevant
the concept of 'acceptability' of that risk for the decision hazards, a quantification of their consequences and
making process is that it should be low relative to other the likelihood of their occurrence.
known and tolerated risks.
1.4. The determination of risk guidelines for hazardous 3. POLICY OBJECTIVES
development and the definition of hazardous activities
are matters within the domain of the Environmental • To ensure that developments are reviewed with a
Protection Authority (EPA) under the Environmental view to maintaining appropriate public safety.
Protection Act 1986 and the Department of Mines
under the Explosives and Dangerous Goods Act 1961. • To maintain acceptably low risk exposure through
While the technical determination of risk levels will be appropriate planning procedures.
considered by these authorities, planning authorities
should be familiar with the issues and consider the • To provide guidelines for the consideration of the
planning implications and strategies for minimising risk influence of existing risk levels in the planning
exposure. process.
1. 5. The main objective of this policy is to ensure that the • To provide for the development of industries and
planning process addresses exposure of the public to activities which are hazardous but which are
risk from man-made and natural events. The risk desirable for the benefit of the wider community.
implications of a proposed development should be
taken account of and weighed against factors which 4. GENERAL POLICIES FOR HAZARDOUS
need to be considered in land use planning. The policy DEVELOPMENT
highlights the principles which will guide the State
Planning Commission in its considerations and also 4.1GENERAL STATE PLANNING COMMISSION
identifies the procedures within and associated with the POLICY FOR HAZARDOUS DEVELOPMENT
planning process which should be followed to ensure
that appropriate considerations and referrals are taken 4.1.1 Development should he planned to minimise
account of. and otherwise control risks. Land use
planning should contribute to safety by;
2. DEFINITIONS FOR THE PURPOSE OF
THIS POLICY • securing compatible land uses,
Contaminated Landis defined as land which, because of • providing adequate buffers and
previous or present uses at or near the site, contains providing for safe transport routes,
materials that give rise either directly or indirectly to
immediate or long-term hazards to human health or the • ensuring that infrastructure, such as fire
environment. and other emergency services, are
considered and will have appropriate
Hazardous Industry means an industry which, when in access.
operation and when all measures proposed to minimise its
impact on the locality have been employed (including 4.2 PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES
measures to isolate the industry from existing or likely future
development on other land in the locality), would pose a 4.2.1 Generally the environmental impact
significant risk in relation to the locality, to human health, assessment process will require that
life or property, or to the biophysical environment. alternative locations will be investigated to
Examples of such industry include oil refineries and ensure that all steps have been taken to
chemical plants but would generally exclude light, rural or minimise risks.
service industries.
4.2.2 The consequences of the more likely
Dangerous Goods are those substances declared as hazardous events should be contained within
dangerous goods listed in the Schedule to the Explosives the boundaries of the installation by
and Dangerous Goods (Classification of Dangerous

appropriate engineering design. Calculation 5.2 PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES
of distances relating to such events within the
boundary of a site (and their impact outside 5.2.1 Proposals that are likely to be hazardous may
the site) will be undertaken by the proponent require assessment by the EPA under the
subject to audits by the EPA and the Environmental Protection Act or the
Department of Mines. Department of Mines under section 45 of the
Explosives and Dangerous Goods Act.
4.2.3 Where there is an existing risk from a
hazardous installation, additional hazardous 5.2.2 For a particular proposal it will usually be
development should not add significantly to necessary to prepare a Preliminary Risk
the existing risk. In such circumstances the Analysis to quantify the risk levels in areas
cumulative effect of hazardous developments around the proposal. The proponent would
should not exceed the risk criteria laid down also be expected to identify the existing land
and determined by the EPA. uses exposed to various risk levels. Of
particular concern is the location of the most
exposed residents or other members of the
5. HAZARDOUS INDUSTRY public.
5.1 STATE PLANNING COMMISSION POLICY ON 5.2.3 If exposure, and all other potential impacts,
HAZARDOUS INDUSTRY are judged to be acceptable the EPA would
recommend that the proposal could proceed,
5. 1. 1 New hazardous development shah be located subject to certain recommendations relating
in industrial areas, separated from residential to the management of impacts. These would
areas. include more detailed levels of hazard and risk
analysis as the design and construction of the
5.1.2 Where practicable, town planning schemes proposal proceeds. Normally there would be
should provide zones specifically for recommendations to cover emergency
hazardous industry which prohibit all planning, both on-site and off-site.
habitation -(such as caretakers residence) and
non-hazardous industries that are labour 5.2.4 In making the decision on permitting a
intensive and/or that have a retail proposal, the Minister for the Environment
component. may adopt some or all of the EPA's
recommendations as conditions, and may add
5.1.3 Hazardous industry areas should have buffer additional conditions at the request of other
zones. The extent of buffer zones should he decision makers. These conditions then are
determined in the context of an assessment of binding on the proponent and other decision
the type of existing or likely industry to be makers.
accommodated in the hazardous industry
zone. 5.2.5 Planning authorities should participate fully in
the assessment process, firstly to provide the
5.1.4 The likely future use of the land in the buffer most up-to-date information on surrounding
zone should be considered when assessing existing and proposed land uses, and secondly
hazardous development, and controls should to obtain feedback on the implications of the
be provided within the town planning scheme final Ministerial conditions for land use
to ensure that uses likely to increase planning. Such feedback could include
residential use, or commercial activities recommendations as to the adequate
attracting significant volumes of employees or separation distances from other land uses or
customers, are restricted. the views of the public conveyed through any
public participation process or assessment of
5.1.5 Any development which introduces a social impact.
substantial number of people into an area
where the individual risks are significant when 5.2.6 Separation distances generally will be
compared with other risks to which they are determined by the Department of Mines and
exposed in everyday fife should be avoided. the EPA in the context of these assessments.
Some people such as hospital patients, Standard setbacks and conditions have been
children at school or the elderly are more used for the approval of existing dangerous
vulnerable to hazards and less able to take goods premises. It is therefore important to
evasive action relative to the general ensure the maintenance of these setbacks
residential population. Uses likely to attract when developments are occurring in the
these groups should be particularly vicinity of existing premises. The planning
discouraged in proximity to hazardous authority should contact the Explosives and
industry. Dangerous Goods Division of the Mines
Department for advice on separation
5.1.6 In planning for new industrial development it distances.
is desirable to select areas where a buffer zone
can be maintained in the long term. Public 5.2.7 The EPA's Guidelines on Risks and Hazard of
ownership of a buffer zone may be the most Industrial Developments on Residential Areas
appropriate safeguard to ensure that use of in Western Australia (Bulletin 278) establish
land in the buffer zone is secured. risk guidelines for adjacent residential land
and for assessing the acceptability of risk
levels. The criteria include all components of
risk including fire, explosion and toxic gas
emissions.

6. STORAGE OF DANGER01 IS GOODS 8. NON-HAZARDOUS DEVELOPMENT
OR ADJACENT TO HAZARDOUS
6.1 STATE PLANNING COMMISSION POLICY ON LOCATIONS
STORAGE OF DANGEROUS GOODS
8.1 STATE PLANNING COMMISSION POLICY
6.1.1 Significant quantities of dangerous Goods ON PLANNING NEAR HAZARDOUS LOCATIONS
should be stored in areas zoned Industrial or
reserved for an appropriate special purpose. 8.1.1 Hazard may be an additional consideration to
be addressed in the siting of major new
6.1.2 In considering proposals for development of facilities such as airports, ocean ports or
warehouses, open air storage and industries major installations or the planning of land
involving storage, a planning authority should around existing such facilities. It will generally
establish whether dangerous goods, or be expected that a risk analysis be undertaken
materials that may cause a hazard in the event as part of the preparation of airport Master
of a fire, are to be stored on site. Plans.
6.2 PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES (Noise is the main problem associated with
planning near airports. This will be addressed in a
6.2.1 The storage of dangerous goods must meet separate policy.)
the -regulatory requirements of the
Department of Mines and EPA and the 8.2 STATE PLANNING COMMISSION POLICY ON
relevant Australian Standards in terms of PLANNING FOR NATURAL EVENTS
design and separation distances. Referral of
applications involving the storage of 8.2.1 Natural events include tropical and mid-
dangerous goods should be to the latitude cyclones as well as earthquakes and
Department of Mines and the EPA to their associated consequences, such as floods
determine the appropriate standards and the and land slip. Bushfires could also be regarded
need, in some instances, for a risk as hazardous natural events.
assessment.
8.2.2 A planning authority is bound to consider
6.2.2 A risk analysis, should one be required, would information relating to the probability of
identify the ways m which the storage could extreme natural events in making planning
be so designed to reduce or eliminate risk. decisions. (Legal advice is that a planning
Regulatory controls administered by the authority has a limited and general liability m
Department of Mines establish the procedures terms of human safety and property damage
for dealing with emergencies. 9 it gives approval to a development in the
knowledge of a level of risk).
8.2.3 Rezonings in cyclone prone areas should
7. TRANSPORTATION OF DANGEROUS proceed after account is taken of the storm
GOODS surge hazard zone and there may be a need to
refuse applications or require developers to
7.1 STATE PLANNING COMMISSION POLICY ON raise floor levels in areas subject to storm
TRANSPORT OF DANGEROUS GOODS surge hazard. Similarly, allowance should be
made to accommodate naturally occurring
7.1.1 While this matter is not necessarily related to shoreline movement particularly where that
land use planning and is generally covered by occurs m response to storm activity. The
other legislation, planners should take allowance to accommodate shoreline
account of the resulting transport movement is necessarily additional to any
requirements when locating a hazardous reservation of coastal land for recreational
facility. Consideration should be given to road purposes. The Country Coastal Planning
reserve widths and routes to facilitate safe Policy (DC 6.1) of the State Planning
road or rail transport options. Commission, addresses these matters.
7.1.2 In granting development approval a planning 8.2.4 In areas prone to tropical cyclones it may be
authority may consider it to be appropriate to appropriate to place power lines underground
specify the way in which goods will access the to avoid possible risk and communications
site from adjacent roads. breakdown in the event of a cyclone.
7.2 PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES 8.2.5 Land within the floodways of river systems, as
defined by the Water Authority of Western
7.2.1 In negotiations with a proponent, in Australia, or watercourses liable to flooding,
conjunction with the regulatory agencies, it should not generally be developed for
may be appropriate to consider the actual residential or commercial purposes. While
route to be taken in transporting goods to and recreational land use may be appropriate,
from a site or specify a particular mode of improvements which could result in
transport, such as rail. It would be interference with the free flow of flood water
inappropriate to impose such conditions on a should be avoided.
development approval.
8.2.6 The development of land for residential or
intensive rural uses should take account of fire
hazard with development being strongly

discouraged in high hazard areas. Areas in • The extent to which future purchasers
which fire control measures, (firebreaks, should be forewarned of any hazard by
buffer zones, fire access tracks, water supplies memorandum or covenants on titles or
and fire suppression arrangements), cannot through appropriate town planning
be practically met should he avoided. Details scheme provisions.
of bush fire evaluation and/or mitigation
measures which have been or will be
undertaken to the satisfaction of the Bush
Fires Board and the local authority, should be
provided in local rural strategies and
applications to rezone and subdivide rural
land likely to be prone to fire hazard. Account
should be taken of the Planning for Better
Bushfire Protection Guidelines.
8.2.7 Where land is subject to risks and possible
hazards arising from radiation the advice of
the Radiological Council should be sought.
9. PLANNING FOR CONTAMINATED LAND
9.1 STATE PLANNING COMMISSION POLICY ON
CONTAMINATED LAND
9.1.1 The State Planning Commission will not
approve applications to rezone, develop or
subdivide land which has been contaminated
unless it is satisfied that the approval of the
proposal is in the long term interest of the
community, having regard to the advice of the
EPA.
9.2 PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES
9.2.1 Where land may have been contaminated
from past uses or current activities,
redevelopment of the land should not proceed
until a site history, description and
preliminary sampling and investigation
program has been completed. The results of
such a program will indicate an appropriate
course of action. Proposals to develop
contaminated land, with a potential to cause
significant environmental impacts, should be
referred to the EPA for assessment.
9.2.2 Where it is proposed to rezone potentially
contaminated land, and land adjacent to
potentially contaminated land, for residential
use, the EPA will normally require a full
assessment to be undertaken to satisfactorily
address the following:
• An audit of all contaminants that could
be present in the sod, in the water table
or on adjacent land.
• Sampling and testing of soil and water
samples for possible contaminants.
• The safeguards which should be
imposed on future development to
ensure that chemicals are isolated and
contained so as not to affect surface
contact or water extraction or
subsequent users.