113/2015
Planning Bulletin 113/2015
Multiple dwellings in R40 coded areas
and variation to R-Codes multiple
dwelling development standards
July 2015
1. Purpose 3. Local planning scheme • from a central/centroid point within
amendment proposals an activity centre boundary.
To outline acceptable local planning
scheme amendment proposals The WAPC will consider local planning • walkable catchment technique
seeking to control multiple dwelling scheme amendment proposals (under (refer Liveable Neighbourhoods
development in R40 coded areas MST clause 5.3 Special Application of Appendix 3).
and variation to multiple dwelling Residential Planning Codes) seeking
standards for consistent application to restrict the number of multiple
4. Variation to R-Codes
throughout Western Australia. dwellings in R40 coded areas by
multiple dwelling
applying the average site area per
grouped dwelling standard, in lieu of standards
2. Background
plot ratio standard, for R40 coded lots
Some multiple dwelling proposals
Issues have been raised from the located outside of the following core
have obtained approval for plot
2010 changes to the Residential areas:
ratio substantially greater than the
Design Codes (R-Codes), removing
• Within 800 metres of any maximum R-Codes deemed-to-
the site area per dwelling requirement
existing or proposed strategic comply amount, which has triggered
for multiple dwellings in areas coded
metropolitan, secondary, district local government and resident
R30 and above in favour of plot ratio
or specialised activity centre or concern.
control.
railway station on a high frequency
Notwithstanding the R-Codes set
They identified a community rail route.
a maximum deemed-to-comply
perception that the changes
In addition to the above, the following plot ratio standard based upon the
have encouraged inappropriate
optional locational criteria may R-Coding of a site (refer Clause 6.1.1
multiple dwelling densification,
be applied, at Local Government C1 and Table 4), the corresponding
adversely affecting the amenity of
discretion: design principle (P1) allows discretion
predominantly single dwelling existing
to vary, if the bulk and scale is in
neighbourhoods coded R30 and R35. • Within 200 m of public open space
accordance with the local planning
(preferably overlooking public
The R-Codes have been amended to framework and is consistent with
open space).
address these issues and will come existing or future desired built form of
into operation in October 2015. In • Within 400 m of a local or the locality.
addition, some local governments neighbourhood activity centre.
A local planning scheme provision
also seek to restrict or otherwise
prohibit multiple dwellings in existing • Within 250 m of a bus stop on a prevails over an R-Codes provision
R40 coded areas. high frequency bus route. where it is inconsistent.
Issues have also been raised from the The WAPC supports greater than Most local planning schemes contain
variation to R-Codes multiple dwelling R40 densities and multiple dwelling a provision which allows discretion
standards, particularly plot ratio. provision within the above locations; to broadly vary site and development
A standardised approach is required however, not necessarily for all standards (refer MST clause 5.5
in respect to quantum and criteria land within these locations. Local Variations to site and development
applied to multiple dwelling proposals government must consider and standards and requirements).
seeking variation to R-Codes plot ratio implement via their local planning/ However, few outline the maximum
and other development standards. housing strategy and local planning quantum amount and/or the criteria
scheme review process, and via or circumstances where and how
an activity centre structure plan for variations to standards are considered
centres. and determined.
Location measurement can be The WAPC supports local government
undertaken using the following preparing and implementing a local
methods: planning policy to appropriately deal
with multiple dwelling development
• straight line from any pedestrian proposals seeking variation to the
entry to a railway station or bus R-Codes ‘deemed-to-comply’
stop to any part of a lot (refer standards. In doing so, the local
R-Codes definition of high planning policy should address the
frequency bus and rail route). following matters:
1

• the maximum plot ratio bonus: the 5. Application and 6. Further information
WAPC supports a maximum plot implementation
Enquiries or correspondence on this
ratio bonus (above the deemed-to-
comply plot ratio in R-Codes Where a local government seeks planning bulletin should be sent by
Table 4) of 25 per cent for R30 to to initiate a local planning scheme email to rcodesreview@planning.
R80 codes, up to a maximum of amendment proposal in accordance wa.gov.au or by post to:
50 per cent for R100 and greater with this planning bulletin, WAPC
Planning Manager, Urban Policy
codes, to align with existing consent to publicly advertise is
Department of Planning
R-Codes plot ratio standards. waived.
Gordon Stephenson House
• the criteria applied to multiple Where a local government seeks to 140 William Street
dwelling proposals seeking plot prepare a local planning policy in Perth WA 6000
ratio bonus and variance to other accordance with this planning bulletin,
Please quote reference
R-Codes ‘deemed-to-comply’ it does not require WAPC consent to
DP14/00301/1
development standards. Local initiate. However, it must be referred
government is to determine what to the WAPC for final approval as Information relevant to this Planning
criteria is appropriate for its area/ required under R-Codes Clause 7.3.2. Bulletin is published at
precinct. www.planning.wa.gov.au
The local planning policy preparation,
In order for the maximum amount public advertising and determination
of variation to be supported via an process must be followed as outlined
exercise of discretion, the proposal in the local planning scheme (refer
should achieve all such criteria. Part 2 of the Model Scheme Text).
Criteria could relate to, but not
limited to, building design and
quality, dwelling size and type
(particularly provision of adaptable
and/or universally accessible aged
or dependent persons’ and single
bedroom dwellings), sustainability
and energy efficiency, housing
affordability, heritage and vegetation
retention, removing vehicle access
fronting a major road, removing a
non-conforming use, communal
facilities, public open space and
public art.
Disclaimer © Western Australia Planning Commission website: www.planning.wa.gov.au
email: corporate@planning.wa.gov.au
This document has been published by the Western Australian Published by the
Planning Commission. Any representation, statement, Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 9000
opinion or advice expressed or implied in this publication is Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
made in good faith and on the basis that the government, its 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
employees and agents are not liable for any damage or loss Perth WA 6000 infoline: 1800 626 477
whatsoever which may occur as a result of action taken or not Locked Bag 2506 This document is available
taken, as the case may be, in respect of any representation, Perth WA 6001 in alternative formats on
statement, opinion or advice referred to herein. Professional application to Department of
Published July 2015
advice should be obtained before applying the information Planning Communication Services.
contained in this document to particular circumstances. ISSN 1324-9142
2