Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design of
Buildings
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP1.8
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 27 August 2019
Background
The planning and design of places and buildings can assist in the reduction of crime and anti-social
behaviour through improvements in building design, lighting, fencing and surveillance of the area.
Crime Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTED) involves the application of these design
improvements to minimise the potential for the place or site to facilitate or support crime or
antisocial behaviour.
Policy Objectives
The Objectives of this Policy are as follows:
1. To reduce the potential for crime and anti-social behaviour to occur within the City of
Melville through well designed buildings and places;
2. To raise awareness of key community safety, security and crime prevention issues,
designing out crime principles and solutions;
3. To ensure that planning for development and redevelopment activity within the City of
Melville takes into consideration designing out Crime principles.
Policy Scope
This Policy draws upon the principles outlined within the Western Australian Planning
Commission’s (WAPC) ‘Designing out Crime – Planning Guidelines” which were released in 2006.
The guidelines state that ‘it is important that the relevant parts of the guidelines are incorporated in
part or as a whole in local planning policies’ to result in a better planning and design outcome for
the community.
This policy is to be read in conjunction with the City of Melville Local Planning Scheme No. 6 the
State Planning Policy 7.3 Residential Design Codes Volumes 1 and 2 (R-Codes) and other local
planning policies. The policy is to apply to all residential and non-residential developments.
With regard to the application of CPTED principles to the design of public spaces, reserves and
subdivision proposals, the abovementioned WAPC guidelines should be taken into account.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:47 AM Page 1 of 3
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Policy Statement
1 Design Elements
1.1 Passive Surveillance
(a) The development is to have a view of the adjacent footpath or road reserve of the
Primary Street (and Secondary Street if on a corner lot) from the ground floor level
windows;
(b) Developments comprising two or more storey structures should be designed to
incorporate windows which have a view over the Primary Street (and Secondary
Street if on a corner lot);
(c) Open-air car parking areas are to be overlooked by windows and/or outdoor living
areas from within the subject development or the existing developments on
surrounding sites;
(d) Developments abutting areas reserved as open space are to incorporate windows or
balconies overlooking the reserve;
(e) Landscaping is not to obstruct views of the adjacent footpath or road reserve from
ground floor level windows.
1.2 Graffiti
(a) Building designs are to avoid blank walls or fences which will be accessible from the
public realm. Where this is not possible, such structures are to incorporate an anti-
graffiti treatment.
1.3 Fencing
(a) Fencing within the front setback of properties is to be visually permeable above 1.2m
in height.
1.4 Design Elements for Non-Residential and Multiple Dwelling Developments
(a) Developments are not to incorporate blind corners adjacent to pedestrian paths.
(b) Developments are not to include recessed doorways or alcoves that restrict natural
surveillance adjacent to pedestrian paths.
(c) Parking areas, access ways and entrances are to be well lit for clear visibility at night
or a closed circuit television system is to be installed.
2 Variations to Design Elements
Where variations or alternative measures are proposed to the Design Elements in Part 1
above, the Council is to be satisfied that the development is adequately designed so to
reduce the potential for crime and anti-social behavior to occur.
3 Advertising
Variations to the above design elements need not be advertised to adjoining property
owners unless in the opinion of Council, the variation will adversely affect the amenity of
any adjoining property.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:47 AM Page 2 of 3
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

4 Notes
Where any of the above provisions result in developments which are inconsistent with the
R-Codes relating to Visual Privacy, the R-Codes will prevail.
References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No. 6
State Planning Policy 7.3 Residential Design Codes
Volume 1 and Residential Design Codes Volume 2 -
Apartments
Delegated Authority No: DA-020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Ordinary Meeting of Council 19/07/2011 P11/3225
Reviews
Ordinary Meeting of Council 18/3/2014 P14/3472
Ordinary Meeting of Council 15/3/2016 P16/3694
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/09/2016 P16/3718
Administrative Review 27/8/2019
(Council Resolution 18/6/2019)
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:47 AM Page 3 of 3
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.