Local Planning
Policy 3.22
North Fremantle
fremantle.wa.gov.au
0

North Fremantle
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. This policy may be cited as
Local Planning Policy 3.22– North Fremantle (LPP 3.22).
Introduction
The purpose of this policy is to provide built form and design guidance to areas within
North Fremantle.
Objectives
The objectives of this policy are to:
• Ensure that new development is consistent with the existing pattern of
development within each sub area;
• Ensure that new development does not detract from or overwhelm the natural
landscapes or existing streetscapes; and
• Conserve and enhance the natural and cultural environmental heritage of the
areas.
Application of this policy
This policy applies to all land within the City of Fremantle Local Planning Scheme No. 4.
Specific sub-areas are designated on the map below (Figure 1). Where a development
proposes to vary the policy criteria, the development must demonstrate compliance with
the objectives of this policy and the relevant design principles of the R-Codes.
This policy is to be read in conjunction with Schedule 7, Local Planning Area 3 – North
Fremantle.
Where this policy is inconsistent with the Scheme or an adopted structure plan or local
development plan, that instrument shall prevail to the extent of any inconsistency. Where
this policy is inconsistent with a more general local planning policy, this policy shall prevail
to the extent of any inconsistency.
1

Figure 1: North Fremantle Sub-Areas
2

Policy provisions
All Sub Areas
A. Clause 5.1.2 C2.1 (iii) of R-Codes Volume 1 for primary street setback averaging
does not apply to any sub areas within this policy unless otherwise specified.
B. Setbacks to open space reserves and river foreshore reserves are as follows:
i. Primary street and rear setbacks abutting a river foreshore reserve should be
6m from the foreshore reserve boundary. Small, single storey, free standing
structures of open construction, such as pergolas and patios, may be
considered within the rear setback, to within 4m of the rear boundary.
ii. Development abutting other open space reserves, and side setbacks to a river
foreshore reserve, should be set back from the reserve boundary in
accordance with Table 2a of R-Codes Volume 1 to avoid boundary walls.
Boundary walls are not permitted abutting other open space reserves, and
side setbacks to a river foreshore reserve.
C. Fencing on boundaries along an open space reserve and the river foreshore reserve
should be visually permeable above 1.2m and with a maximum height of 1.8m with
piers up to 2m.
1. Sub Area 1 – Minim Cove
Figure 2: Sub-Area 1 – Minim Cove
1.1 The R-Codes minimum primary street setback criterion apply unless otherwise
varied by the following:
3

Nos. Primary Street Setback
3m
7-17 Westmeath St
3m (Mathieson Ave)
39-49 Mathieson Ave
3m
28-38 Mathieson Ave
4m (Mathieson Ave)
1 & 3 Dublin Lane & 38 & 40 The Cutting
3m
30 – 36 The Cutting
1.2 For all lots except Lot 217 (Strata Plan 73153), where a garage forms part of the
main building structure and the total width of the garage element of the building
structure projecting into the front setback area does not exceed 7 metres, then the
garage may have a minimum primary street setback of 1.5 metres. Otherwise,
garages should be set back in line with the dwelling.
2. Sub Area 2 – Alfred Road, Corkhill Street, Harvest Road and Foreshore
Figure 3: Sub-Area 2 – Alfred Road, Corkhill Street, Harvest Road and Foreshore
2.1 The R-Codes minimum street setback criterion applies unless otherwise varied by
the following:
Primary Street Setback
Corkhill Street 3m
Ainslie Road 4m
Harvest Road 9m
Alfred Road 3m
Cypress Lane 4m
4

2.2 Buildings on the southeast side of Ainslie Road should be single storey on their
northwestern frontage and may step up to two storeys as the land slopes down to
Harvest Road to minimise visual bulk.
2.3 Secondary street frontage should be articulated and provide a degree of visual
interaction with the public space while avoiding blank walls, service ducts or high,
solid fencing.
2.4 Fences abutting a reserve or within a street setback should be constructed of
traditional materials including limestone, cement render, wrought iron (including
steel and other metal finishes) and timber pickets and should complement the
materials used in the dwelling. Fibro cement, sheet metal, pinelap, brushwood and
similar materials should be avoided.
2.5 There is an existing heritage limestone retaining wall that runs along the southern
boundary of lots 201 and 202 where they front Harvest Road. Any fencing along
this frontage is to be self-supporting, set back a minimum of 1m behind the
limestone wall, and with a maximum height of 1.2m. No additional openings should
be made in the limestone wall.
3. Sub Area 3 – Eucla Court
Figure 4: Sub-Area 3 – Eucla Court
3.1 The primary street setback to Eucla Court is 4m.
3.2 Primary street fencing to Lots 201 – 204 Rule Street should be a maximum of 1.3m
in height and visually permeable.
5

4. Sub Area 4 – Northbank
Figure 5: Sub-Area 4 – Northbank
4.1 For single houses and grouped dwellings on lots zoned Residential and with vehicle
access solely to the primary street, the primary street setback is 4m. Setback
averaging under clause 5.1.2 C2.1 (iii) of the R-Codes Volume 1 may be considered
provided a 1m minimum street setback is maintained.
4.2 All fencing along a street boundary should be a maximum of 1.2m in height and
preferably visually permeable to maintain continuity along the streetscape.
5. Sub Area 5 – Binns Court
Figure 6: Sub-Area 5 – Binns Court
5.1 The primary street setback for Binns Court and Lots 22-25 Thompson Road is 3m.
6

6. Sub Area 6 - Lime Street
Figure 7: Sub-Area 6 – Lime Street
6.1 The primary street setback to Lime Street is 2.5m.
7. Sub Area 7 – Leighton Beach
Figure 8: Sub-Area 7 – Lime Street
7.1 Refer to Schedule 9, Development Plan 17 within the City of Fremantle Local Planning
Scheme No. 4 for development controls.
7

Definitions
R-Codes means Residential Design Codes Volume 1 or 2.
Responsibility and review information
Responsible officer: Manager City Planning
Document adoption/approval details 13 May 2026 – C2605-8
Document amendment details Adoption – Amalgamated several existing
policies
Next review date 13 May 2030
(every 4 years)
8