Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure Local
Planning Policy
Responsible directorate: Planning and Community Development
Objectives:
• To ensure the location, design and siting of container deposit scheme infrastructure is
complementary to the character, functionality and amenity of urban localities.
• To prevent any negative impacts on local amenity from the operation of the container deposit
scheme infrastructure.
• To enable the timely, cost-effective delivery of essential container deposit scheme infrastructure.
• To provide conveniently located infrastructure to ensure the container deposit schemes’ effective
reduction of litter, increased recycling and protection of the environment.
1. Authority:
This policy has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2 of the deemed provisions
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 which allows the
local government to prepare local planning policies relating to planning and development within
the Scheme Area.
2. Application:
This policy applies to infrastructure associated with the container deposit scheme within the City
of Joondalup, as outlined in this policy.
3. Definitions:
“container collection cage” means a cage, or other structure, that is designed to store
containers deposited at return points, and is incidental to the predominant land use.
“container deposit scheme infrastructure” means a reverse vending machine or a container
collection cage.
“reverse vending machine” means a permanently-located unattended device that accepts
empty beverage containers, and is incidental to the predominant land use.
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure 1

“the Heritage Act” means the Heritage of Western Australia Act 1990.
“the Noise Regulations” means Environmental Protection (Noise) Regulations 1997 (as
amended) prepared under the Environmental Protection Act 1986.
“the Regulations” means the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015 prepared under the Planning and Development Act 2005.
“total lot area” means the total land area of a freehold or survey strata lot.
“the Scheme” means the City of Joondalup Local Planning Scheme No. 3.
4. Statement:
The purpose of this policy is to provide an exemption in accordance with Clause 61(1)(20) and
(2)(e) of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 from the
requirement to obtain development approval for container deposit scheme infrastructure
proposals which satisfy minimum development standards.
5. Details:
Development approval will not be required for container deposit scheme infrastructure proposals
that comply with the provisions of this policy, in accordance with clause 61(1)(20) and (2)(e) of
the deemed provisions of the Scheme provided for by the Regulations, unless the development
is proposed on land in a place that is:
1. entered in the Register of Heritage Places under the Heritage Act; or
2. the subject of an order under Part 6 of the Heritage Act; or
3. included on a heritage list prepared in accordance with the Scheme; or
4. within an area designated under the Scheme as a heritage area; or
5. the subject of a heritage agreement entered into under section 29 of the Heritage Act.
Container deposit scheme infrastructure proposed to be erected on a temporary basis of not
more than 48 hours within a 12-month period are typically exempt from approval, as per the
requirements of 61(1)(17) and (2)(f) of the deemed provisions provided in the Regulations and
contained within the Scheme. As such, the policy provisions would not apply.
5.1. Specified exemptions:
a. The development or operation of a large reverse vending machine is development
for which development approval is not required where it complies with all the relevant
development standards outlined below (unless otherwise agreed by the local
government), and may take place in any zone, with the exception of the:
i. residential and urban development zones.
b. The development of a container collection cage is development for which
development approval is not required where it complies with all the relevant
development standards outlined below (unless otherwise agreed by the local
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure 2

government), and may take place in any zone, including a residential or rural zone or
public purpose reserve where the land is lawfully used for the purposes of:
i. Civic use; and/or
ii. Community purpose; and/or
iii. Educational establishment.
5.2. General:
Where the development of a reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is
proposed, the infrastructure must not result in any change to the approved land use in a
way that would result in the use no longer complying with any relevant development
standards and/or requirements of the Scheme.
5.2.1. Location:
a. Container deposit scheme infrastructure must not be erected within 10 metres
of an adjoining lot boundary that accommodates a residential use.
b. Container deposit scheme infrastructure must not restrict any vehicular or
pedestrian access to or from, or entry to any building on, the land on which the
infrastructure is located.
c. Container deposit scheme infrastructure must not obstruct the operation of, or
access to, any utility services on the land on which the infrastructure is located
or on adjacent land.
d. To preserve pedestrian and vehicular sightlines, and servicing access,
container deposit scheme infrastructure must not be erected within two metres
of any road reserve or right-of-way intersection or crossover, and shall be
located in such a way that it does not reduce existing car park sightlines, aisle
widths and manoeuvring spaces.
e. Where the development of a container collection cage is proposed, the
collection cage must be located in a car park or service area to be visually
unobtrusive, and must be secured, locked and immovable.
5.2.2. Visual amenity:
a. Where the development of container deposit scheme infrastructure is proposed
outdoors, placement of the infrastructure must not result in the removal of any
vegetation, landscaping or street tree.
b. Container deposit scheme infrastructure must be constructed and clad with
low-reflective, graffiti-resistant materials, which provide protection from the
elements and, where not consisting of promotional or branding material
approved under the operation of the container deposit scheme, are consistent
in colour and finish to that of nearby existing buildings.
c. Where the development of container deposit scheme infrastructure is proposed
outdoors, the infrastructure must not display any advertising signage other than
promotional or brand signage approved under the operation of the container
deposit scheme.
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure 3

d. Where the development of container deposit scheme infrastructure is proposed
outdoors, and the infrastructure exceeds a development footprint of 10 square
metres, bins for the removal of waste or recyclable materials not accepted by
the infrastructure are to be provided and serviced regularly to maintain the
amenity of the area, at a rate of one (1) waste bin and 0.5 recycling bins (both
240L in volume) per 10 square metres of development footprint.
5.2.3. Operational amenity:
a. Where the development of container deposit scheme infrastructure is
proposed, the operation of the infrastructure must not prejudicially affect the
amenity of the locality due to the emission of light, noise, vibration, electrical
interference, smell or any other by-product.
b. Where the development or operation of a large reverse vending machine is
proposed adjacent to land that accommodates a residential use, the machine
must operate only between the approved opening hours of the predominant
land use, or in the absence of any other use:
i. between 7.00am and 7.00pm Monday to Saturday; and
ii. between 9.00am and 7.00pm on Sunday and public holidays.
c. Where the development or operation of a large reverse vending machine is
proposed, the reverse vending machine when in operation must not emit noise
at a level which exceeds any requirement(s) under the Noise Regulations.
d. Where the development or operation of container deposit scheme
infrastructure is proposed, the infrastructure must be provided with lighting that
complies with AS/NZS1158.3.1:2020 Pedestrian area (Category P) lighting -
performance and design requirements (as amended).
e. Where the development or operation of container deposit scheme
infrastructure is proposed, the infrastructure must be accessible to any person
with a disability.
5.2.4. Development footprint:
a. Where the development of a container collection cage is proposed outdoors,
the cage must not:
i. have a development footprint of more than eight (8) square metres; or
ii. be more than two (2) metres in height.
b. Where the development of a large reverse vending machine is proposed
outdoors, on land not used for car parking, the machine must not:
i. have a development footprint of more than 45 square metres, and
ii. be more than three (3) metres in height, or have dimensions greater than
eight (8) metres by six (6) metres.
c. Where the development of a large reverse vending machine is proposed within
an existing car park comprising more than 40 car parking spaces, the area
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure 4

occupied by the reverse vending machine must not exceed the greater of the
following areas:
i. The area comprising four (4) car parking spaces; or
ii. 45 square metres, where the car park contains 200 car parking spaces or
less; or
iii. 75 square metres, where the car park contains 200 or more car parking
spaces.
d. Where the development of container deposit scheme infrastructure is proposed
outdoors, the infrastructure shall be installed at a rate no greater than:
i. Container collections cage – one (1) per lot; or
ii. Large reverse vending machine proposed on land not used for car
parking – one (1) per 15,000 square metres of total lot area; or
iii. Large reverse vending machine proposed in an existing car park
comprising more than 40 car parking spaces – one (1) per 1000 car
parking spaces.
Creation date: August 2020 (CJ120-08/20)
Formerly:
Amendments: CJ357-12/25
Last reviewed: December 2025 (CJ357-12/25)
Related documentation: • Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
• Local Planning Scheme No. 3
File reference: 108939
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure 5