Alfresco Spaces Local Planning Policy
Responsible directorate: Planning and Community Development
Objectives:
• To support businesses seeking to contribute to the activation of the public realm through the
provision of alfresco spaces by reducing the regulatory burden of the planning framework.
• To exempt certain forms of alfresco spaces from the requirement for development approval.
• To provide a framework for the assessment of development applications which are required for
certain forms of alfresco spaces.
1. Authority:
This policy has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2 of the deemed provisions
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 which allows the
local government to prepare local planning policies relating to planning and development within
the Scheme area.
2. Application:
This policy shall apply to all alfresco spaces situated on City-owned or managed land, typically
within a road reserve (excluding any regional road reserve).
3. Definitions:
“alfresco spaces” means extensions of existing businesses into the adjacent public realm.
These spaces may or may not be designed for the consumption of food and beverages. Alfresco
spaces may include, but are not limited to, furniture such as chairs and tables, planter boxes,
weather protection structures (such as umbrellas and café blinds) and fencing/barriers to define
the alfresco space.
“public realm” means all public spaces situated on City-owned or managed land including
verges, reserves/public open space, civic squares and other areas used by and accessible to
the community.
Alfresco Spaces 1

“regional road” means a road reserve identified under the Metropolitan Region Scheme as an
other regional road or primary regional road.
“temporary furniture” means furniture that is not fixed in place and that is removed from the
public realm outside of the operating hours of the associated business.
“verge” means the space between the property boundary and the road, commonly occupied by
footpath or landscaping.
“vergelet” means furniture that may remain in the public realm outside of the operating hours of
the associated business. Vergelet furniture is to be fixed in place or significantly weighted (to the
satisfaction of the City) and may be in the form of furniture attached to a decked platform.
4. Statement:
The Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 identify
development which is exempt from requiring development (planning) approval across Western
Australia. The Regulations allow local governments to prepare local planning policies which
specify additional development that is exempt from development approval.
The City recognises the benefits provided by alfresco spaces, which can contribute to the
activation and vibrancy of the public realm. This local planning policy provides exemptions from
the need to obtain development approval for some forms of alfresco spaces. Where an
application for development approval is required, this local planning policy provides a framework
to guide the assessment of development applications.
5. Details:
5.1. Exemptions from development approval:
The Alfresco Spaces Exemptions table of this local planning policy (Table 1) applies to the
forms of alfresco spaces as stated. Where an application for development approval is
required, the proposed development will be assessed against the corresponding
‘Development Objectives’ set out in Table 1. Additional guidance for each form of alfresco
space is provided in the ‘Guidance’ column.
Alfresco Spaces 2

Table 1 – Alfresco Spaces Exemptions
Form of alfresco Development approval
Development objectives Guidance
space requirements
Temporary furniture Exempt from the need for Refer to the Alfresco Spaces A permit is required under the Local
development approval. Guidelines. Government and Public Property
Local Law 2014 - refer to the
Alfresco Spaces Guidelines.
Vergelets Within the Joondalup City Centre Refer to the Alfresco Spaces A permit is required under the Local
(refer Figure 1): Guidelines. Government and Public Property
• Exempt from the need for Local Law 2014 - refer to the
development approval. Alfresco Spaces Guidelines.
Outside of the Joondalup City Centre
(refer Figure 1):
• Development approval required.
Any form of alfresco Development approval required. Proposed development is to: Assessment of a development
space which does not a) be high-quality and pedestrian application is to have regard to the
meet the definition of friendly Alfresco Spaces Guidelines.
temporary furniture or b) integrate with the surrounding
vergelet. area and enhance the
streetscape
c) Be appropriate to the character
and functions of the area in which
they are located.
d) not impact on the movement of
pedestrians and vehicles,
adjoining properties, access to
services, or works required in the
public realm
e) maintain an open public realm
which is accessible to all.
Alfresco Spaces 3

Figure 1 – Joondalup City Centre
Alfresco Spaces 4

5.2. Public consultation:
Where a development application is required, refer to the City's Planning Consultation
Local Planning Policy.
Creation date: June 1999 (CJ213-06/99)
Formerly: Alfresco Activities Local Planning Policy
Amendments: CJ024-02/04, CJ052-04/08, CJ225-10/09, CJ032-03/12, CJ119-08/20,
CJ129-05/25
Last reviewed: May 2025 (CJ129-05/25)
Related documentation: • Alfresco Spaces Guidelines
• City of Joondalup Local Planning Scheme No 3
• Local Government and Public Property Local Law 2014
• Metropolitan Region Scheme
• Planning and Development (Local Planning Scheme) Regulations
2015
File reference: 03360
Alfresco Spaces 5