Position
Statement:
Electric Vehicle Charging
Infrastructure
March 2024
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the Department © State of Western Australian website: wa.gov.au/dplh
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, Published by the
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result Perth WA 6000
of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect This document is available in alternative
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred Locked Bag 2506 formats on application to the
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before Perth WA 6001 Communications Branch.
applying the information contained in this document to Publication date: 06/03/2024
particular circumstances. Operational date: 06/03/2024

Position Statement:
1
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
March 2024
1. Policy intent 2. Electric vehicle 2.1 Electric vehicle charging
charging infrastructure types
This position statement outlines how
infrastructure in
electric vehicle (EV) charging infrastructure There are broadly three levels of charging
should be considered and assessed in the Western Australia power: Level 1 (general power outlet),
Western Australian planning system. Level 2 (alternating current – AC charging)
The National Electric Vehicle Strategy and Level 3 (direct current – DC charging).
2023 sets a vision to increase the uptake
Level 1 General power outlet:
of EVs to reduce emissions and improve
A place in a wall to connect electrical
the wellbeing of Australians. This includes
equipment to the electricity supply,
objectives and initiatives which relate to
a common household socket/plug.
establishing infrastructure and making it
This is commonly known as trickle
easy to charge.
charging.
The State Government released the State
Level 2 AC-charger: Dedicated
Climate Policy and State Electric Vehicle
chargers with their own plug or socket.
Strategy in November 2020 to prepare for
Includes most high-powered wall-
the transition to low and zero-emission
chargers.
vehicles and maximise economic, social
and environmental benefits to Western Level 3 DC-charger: Supercharging
Australia. A priority area of action in the and ultra-fast direct current charging.
strategy is to implement and facilitate the
EV charging infrastructure can range
provision of EV infrastructure, including the
from 2.3 kilowatts (kW) which typically
charging stations.
takes more than 8 hours to fully charge
The role of planning in implementing EV an EV, through to greater than 350kW
charging infrastructure across the state chargers that can take less than 20
is to provide guidance on appropriate minutes. Estimated charge times also vary
locations and development standards for depending on factors including the type of
different land uses, and to facilitate the charger and plug, make of vehicle, battery
timely delivery of infrastructure to ensure and technology specifications.
an efficient EV charging network.
It is acknowledged that EVs and charging
The increased electrification of vehicles infrastructure technology continue
will assist in reducing greenhouse gas to evolve at a rapid pace, with new
emissions, as well as improve air quality, capabilities and improvements introduced
amenity, and provide potential electricity regularly. Local governments should
grid benefits for the community. consider this when establishing any

Position Statement:
2
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
March 2024
minimum requirements for charging 3. Application of 4. Policy objectives 5. Policy measures
infrastructure (levels) in the planning this policy
framework, including local planning This position statement seeks to achieve 5.1 EV charging infrastructure
schemes and local planning policies. This position statement applies across the following objectives: considerations
Western Australia and provides general • coordinate the approach of planning
With increases in demand for EV charging
guidance to local governments in the decision-making for the provision of When considering planning for the
infrastructure and the known peaks of
preparation of local planning policies EV charging infrastructure throughout installation of publicly available EV
the electricity network, smart charging
with respect to EV charging infrastructure. Western Australia charging infrastructure, proponents/
infrastructure that is capable of being
providers and decision makers should
remotely managed (through connection Policy measures should also be considered • establish recommended planning
consider the broader EV charging network
to the internet and compatible with in the preparation and assessment requirements and guidance for
to ensure that strategic and coordinated
Open Charge Point Protocol 1.6; and throughout all levels of planning, including the installation of EV charging
outcomes are achieved across the State,
includes features for managing tariffs for strategies, schemes, structure plans and infrastructure, including appropriate
and the policy measures below.
idle customers) will be increasingly more development applications. zonings, land uses, amenity and
important and is recommended. This position statement applies to new locations In recognition of EVs being an emerging
proposals or significant redevelopment • enable the safe, timely and efficient and fast-moving industry, innovative and
and is not intended to apply roll-out of EV charging infrastructure alternative solutions for the provision of EV
retrospectively. in support of the State Electric Vehicle charging infrastructure may be proposed
Strategy and Western Australian in place of recommended requirements
This position statement will be reviewed Climate Policy within this Position Statement and any
and revised as policies and standards are adopted local planning policy.
• to recommend specific EV charging
updated.
infrastructure proposals be exempt
5.1.1 Location (Level 2 and above)
from the requirement for planning
approval. There are recognised benefits of EV fast
charging infrastructure provided at the
following preferred locations:
• destinations: such as activity centres,
beaches, food and entertainment
precincts and civic centres
• along major transport routes,
prioritising regional freeway service
centres and roadhouses offering a level
of amenity and convenience
• regional areas, prioritising locations
that complement or contribute to the
EV fast charging infrastructure network

Position Statement:
3
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
March 2024
• public buildings: such as government Where publicly available EV charging and employment, particularly where traffic movement around nearby Regional
office accommodation, hospitals, infrastructure is located adjacent or in solar energy is available, will also assist in and Distributor A roads. In some cases,
educational establishments, civic and close proximity to residential and other reducing the evening electricity peak. a Transport Impact Assessment may be
sports facilities. sensitive land uses, particularly on-street necessary.
Recommended EV charging infrastructure
parking options, minimal visual impacts
When preparing or reviewing local requirements and ratios by land use are In determining the location for installation
should be ensured, such as avoiding bulky
planning strategies and structure plans, outlined in Table 1. Proponents and of EV charging infrastructure, including
structures or excessive lighting.
local governments and proponents should decision-makers of new proposals or within a building or in close proximity to
consider identifying opportunities for significant redevelopment containing other structures, consideration should
5.1.2 Land use
community/public charging facilities at these land uses are encouraged be given to minimise damage and/or
the above preferred locations, as well as With expectations that a large percentage to consider providing EV charging potential secondary impacts in emergency
opportunities for Energy Storage Facilities of EV charging will occur at home, the infrastructure to align with these ratios and situations. This may include bays that are
(large-scale batteries). availability of charging infrastructure in requirements, and local governments may easily accessible to emergency equipment
residential settings is vital. General power use this Table to guide any relevant local and vehicles, and further away from
On-street (kerbside) charging should be
outlets in close proximity to car parking planning policies. significant infrastructure and emergency
considered in areas subject to minimal
bays assigned and/or available to each exits.
on-site parking such as older established Futureproofing is particularly important
residential dwelling are encouraged. Other
suburbs, or areas with high volumes of for new residential and commercial While the risk of crime can be influenced
places of over-night residence, including
apartments. In determining appropriate developments such as multi-storey by a range of factors and cannot simply
hotels, motels and tourist accommodation
locations for on-street charging apartments, office buildings, stand- be prevented through well designed
should consider providing EV charging
infrastructure, local governments should alone car parks and shopping centres, as places alone, Crime Prevention Through
infrastructure for guests/residents.
liaise with service providers and consider retrofitting to accommodate EV charging Environmental Design (CPTED) is an
factors such as electrical capacity, safety, The provision of facilities for EV charging infrastructure, can be challenging. important tool with proven benefits.
lighting and amenity. Additionally, the equipment in car parking areas of Therefore, local governments can use the
potential impact on the road, pedestrian new multi-storey development, in 5.1.3 Movement networks and safety WAPC’s Safer Places by Design Guidelines
and bicycle paths, existing parking accordance with the requirements of the to enhance safety by minimising crime and
Vehicle and pedestrian safety and sight
restrictions, and demand should be National Construction Codes (NCC), is fear of crime.
lines must be maintained, and EV charging
evaluated. recommended, including for buildings/
infrastructure should allow for clear and
structures where NCC requirements are 5.1.4 Wayfinding
It is acknowledged that in certain safe movement of pedestrians, bicycles,
not yet mandatory. Future-proofing the
locations, broader network upgrades and vehicles. EV charging infrastructure should be
car parking areas of these structures and
may be required to support fast charging easily identifiable. Identification and/or
ensuring that buildings have the capacity Certain land uses such as fast-food
infrastructure. The network provider signage should include directional signs
to support EV charging will enable outlet/lunch bars and service stations can
should confirm the availability of power and bay markings, especially where bays
easier implementation of EV charging lead to queuing during peak periods.
in the locality, whether from the grid or are located within a larger car park and/or
infrastructure when demand arises or As such, the potential traffic impacts of EV
off-grid sources, to support the selection not immediately visible from entry and exit
increases. Charging EVs during day/work charging should be considered, including
of sites for EV charging infrastructure points.
hours at large-scale places of residence the assessment of vehicle queuing and
installation.

Position Statement:
4
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
March 2024
Traffic flow and accessibility requirements, • all EV charging infrastructure contained 6. Other matters 6.1.2 Development applications
ease of connection to existing onsite within a building/structure
Local governments are encouraged to
electricity points, clear identification of • the installation of electrical conduits 6.1 Local planning policy
introduce exemptions to the requirement
EV charging bays and proximity to car and other unobtrusive facilities for
park entrances, should be prioritised over electric vehicle charging equipment Local governments may consider adopting for development approval through the
locations in close proximity to internal a local planning policy to: adoption of a local planning policy.
• EV charging infrastructure that is
building entrances. • introduce the requirement to provide These exemptions may apply to
specified in a local planning policy as
EV charging infrastructure when certain unobtrusive EV charging infrastructure
not requiring development approvall.
5.1.5 Amenity land use and development is proposed; where it is considered incidental to the
Where EV charging infrastructure is • specify the types of EV charging predominant use of the site, and/or
The impact of EV charging infrastructure
considered incidental and unobtrusive, infrastructure development and works complies with the land use, movement
on the quality of the public realm, and
planning decision-makers should not that are exempt from the requirement network and safety, wayfinding, and
existing amenity of surrounding areas,
require development approval. to obtain development approval, amenity considerations. Examples are
including residential and sensitive land
In addition, local governments can pursuant to Schedule 2, Part 7, Clause outlined in Section 5.1.
uses, should be minimised. Proponents
adopt a local planning policy to
61(1) of the Regulations; and
should consider potential amenity impacts In addition, where a development
provide for further exemptions to the
such as: • outline the planning matters application is required, the local
requirement for development approval.
considered when determining EV government may set out specific
• Light pollution. The exemptions may apply when certain
charging infrastructure applications. considerations in a local planning policy.
• Noise. criteria are met, such as being incidental
to the predominant use of the land, not A level of discretion should be provided
• Views and landscape values.
obstructing sight lines and emitting for in any local planning policy, as the EV 6.2 Applications for
• Unnecessary, excessive, and/or third- low illumination. This will minimise the industry is fast-changing, and there may be development approval
party advertising.
potential for land use conflicts and amenity variances in grid capacity which affect the
Proponents seeking to install EV charging
impact from EV charging infrastructure. ability to provide a certain level, or number
5.2 Exemptions from of chargers. infrastructure should engage with the
relevant local government and/or state
the requirement for
government as part of the site selection
development approval 6.1.1 Provisioning ratios
process. This early engagement will allow
In accordance with the Planning and To encourage the provision of EV charging the decision maker to assess if the site (and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) infrastructure, local governments may location within the site) being proposed
Regulations 2015 (the Regulations), consider establishing provisioning ratios is appropriate, how it might relate to the
installation of certain infrastructure does for certain land uses. Recommended levels EV charging network more broadly and
not require development approval. of provision for a number of land uses have determine if development approval is
This includes: been provided in Table 1. required.
• all EV charging infrastructure associated
with single house and grouped
dwellings for private use

Position Statement:
5
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
March 2024
For EV charging infrastructure greater than 6.4 Public works restrictions should match the expected
Level 2, proponents should also consult dwell time at the site time required to
The Public Works Act 1902 is available
with the applicable energy providers to obtain a reasonable charge from the level
on the State Law Publisher’s website and
ascertain the grid capacity and/or any of charger provided. This may include
defines what constitutes a public work.
other infrastructure requirements. consideration of charging/parking time
Certain land use and development (works)
limits, no-parking for non-EVs, and EVs not
In the case of significant batteries and may be considered “public works”.
utilising the charging facility.
energy storage facilities or retrofitting Further guidance is available at -
of multiple dwellings, the Department Approvals and exemptions for public
of Fire and Emergency Services should works.
be consulted to ensure that safety
Where there is no public works
considerations are identified.
exemption and the proposed EV
charging infrastructure is within a reserve,
6.3 Building permit
proponents will be required to liaise
requirements
with the relevant local government and/
or reserve management body, and the
Building permits are generally not required
Department of Planning, Lands and
for the installation of electrical appliances
Heritage (Land Use Management).
as those processes are regulated by
electrical standards. However, the relevant
permit authority should be consulted 6.5 Operation
about the need for a building permit if the
To ensure the continued operation
installation process involves alterations to
of EV charging infrastructure and to
an existing building which could affect the
facilitate easy reporting of faults or
way in which the building or incidental
inoperability, publicly available EV charging
structure complies with each applicable
infrastructure should prominently display
building standard that applies to the
the contact details of the provider and/or
building or incidental structure.
responsible party.
It is noted that Part J9 of the NCC sets out
provisions that enable the monitoring
6.6 Local parking considerations
of energy use and facilitate easy retrofit
of renewable energy and EV charging
Where necessary, the local government
equipment.
may resolve to expand on its local laws
to ensure that its public EV charging
infrastructure and bays, including on-street
parking are utilised as intended. In this
regard, it is recommended that parking

Position Statement:
6
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
March 2024
Definitions / Abbreviations
Electric vehicle (EV) means a battery electric vehicle, plug-in hybrid electric vehicle, or a
fuel cell electric vehicle.
EV charging infrastructure any outlet that provides electricity including general power outlets
to charging stations that provides electrical currents to charge the
battery in an electric vehicle.
EV charging bay a parking bay that is serviced by EV charging infrastructure and is
identified for EV charging.
Facilities for electric vehicle as per Part J9 of the National Construction Code (NCC).
charging equipment
Level 1 general power outlet / wall socket – a place in a wall to connect
electrical equipment to the electricity supply, a common household
socket/plug; standard 3-pin earthed power outlets in Australia.
Level 1; trickle charging
Level 2 or greater alternating current (AC) direct current (DC) charging –
charging – an apparatus or an apparatus or facility with
facility with one or more one or more electrical outlets
electrical outlets for recharging for recharging the batteries
the batteries of electric vehicles of electric vehicles through
through an alternate current. direct current.
Level 2; fast charging. Level 3; fast or rapid charging.
The Regulations means the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015 prepared under the Planning and Development Act
2005.

Position Statement:
7
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
March 2024
TABLE 1
Requirements
Electric vehicle charging
Preferred
infrastructure –
Encouraged
recommended provisioning
ratios
Land use EV charging infrastructure (minimum level of provision)1
Where EV charging infrastructure is not
considered ‘preferred’, it is otherwise
bed and breakfast Level 1 – one communal bay
encouraged or accepted.
caravan park Level 1 – one bay per powered site
Notwithstanding levels of provision
Level 1 – 50% of communal bays
outlined in Table 1, the following variations
to ‘preferred’ requirements apply: caretaker’s dwelling Level 1 – one per dwelling
• Where the electrical grid capacity car park2 Level 2 – 2% of bays
or availability is constrained, or in where >50 bays
other extenuating circumstances
cinema/theatre Level 2 – 2% of bays with a minimum of one bay
where it can be demonstrated that where >200 people accommodated *
an alternative level of infrastructure is excludes open air cinemas
appropriate, discretion to the preferred
civic use Level 2 – 2% of bays with a minimum of one bay
requirement may be applied. where >1,000m2 floorspace *
• Where alternative and/or innovative
club premises Encouraged
solutions are provided for in multi-
storey developments (including car community purpose Encouraged
parks and apartments), discretion to
exhibition centre Level 2 – 2% of bays with a minimum of one bay
the preferred requirement may be where >1,500m2 floorspace *
applied.
freeway service centre Level 2/3 – four bays
holiday accommodation Level 1 – to each bay
holiday house Level 1 – one per dwelling
hospital Encouraged
hotel Level 1 – to each bay assigned for hotel guest use; and
Level 2 – 2% of bays where communal parking (including associated bar/
restaurant/hospitality areas) is available with a minimum of one bay
medical centre Encouraged

Position Statement:
8
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
March 2024
Land use EV charging infrastructure (minimum level of provision)1
motel Level 1 – to each bay assigned for motel guest use; and
Level 2 – 2% of bays where communal parking (including associated bar/
restaurant/hospitality areas) is available with a minimum of one bay
office2 Encouraged
park home park Level 1 – one per site
recreation – private Level 2 – 2% of bays with a minimum of one bay
where >1,500m2 floorspace *
restaurant/cafe Encouraged
road house Level 2/3 – two bays
serviced apartment Level 1 – one per dwelling
service station Encouraged
shop2 Level 2 – one bay per 10,000m2, with a minimum of 2 bays
where >1,500m2 floorspace * i.e 5,001-10,000m2 = 2 EV bays
10,001-20,000m2 = 2 EV bays
20,001-30,000m2 = 3 EV bays...
...100,001-110,000m2 = 11 EV bays
tourist development Level 1 – to 50% of bays assigned for guest use
residential Level 1 – to each parking bay assigned to a dwelling
single house
grouped dwelling
multiple dwelling
single bedroom dwelling
aged and dependents dwelling
Table 1: Recommended EV Charging Infrastructure requirements by land use
1 Minimum level of provision
The level of provision in Table 1 should be credited towards the general car parking requirement for the relevant land use/
development and should only apply where a general car parking requirement applies.
2 Multi-storey developments
Where the new development or redevelopment/expansion is an ‘office’, ‘shop*’ or ‘car park’ land use, or mixed-use development,
and the development is multi-storey, it is recommended that provisions in J9 of the National Construction Code be considered.
* Minimum threshold
The threshold at which EV charging infrastructure is deemed ‘preferred’. For any proposal beneath the floor space threshold, EV
charging infrastructure is encouraged.