Murdoch
Specialised
Activity
Centre
Structure
Plan
January
2014
-
Murdoch
Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan
January 2014

-
Cover image: Kyle Hughes-Odgers “Help is on the way”
Murdoch University ECL Courtyard Mural Artwork
depicts the idea of industry and environment and how they interrelate
(Image used with permission of Murdoch University Art Collection)
Murdoch presents a unique and exciting opportunity to combine
specialised employment, residential living and education in one
place, while also activating the area so it becomes a distinctive
and engaging location for the community.
Disclaimer
This document has been published by the Department of Planning on behalf of the Western Australian
Planning Commission. Any representation, statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the government, its employees and agents are
not liable for any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result of action taken or not taken,
as the case may be, in respect of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred to herein.
Professional advice should be obtained before applying the information contained in this document to
particular circumstances.particular circumstances.
© Western Australian Planning Commission Published January 2014 The Murdoch Specialised Activity
Centre Structure Plan was prepared
Published by the website: www.planning.wa.gov.au
by Hames Sharley under the
Department of Planning email: corporate@planning.wa.gov.au
direction of the Murdoch Activity
Gordon Stephenson House
tel: 08 655 19000 Centre Structure Plan project
140 William Street
fax: 08 655 19001 management group.
Perth WA 6000
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
Locked Bag 2506 infoline: 1800 626 477
Perth WA 6001
This document is available in
alternative formats on application to
Communication Services.

Murdoch
Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan
Final
January 2014
This Structure Plan for the Murdoch Activity Centre
is a high-level, aspirational and long-term plan and a
range of issues will require further consideration over
time including further detailed planning, funding, and
legislative changes. New and upgraded infrastructure
needed to implement the Structure Plan in the
medium to long-term has not been committed to, or
funded by, Government.
I Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan

Minister’s foreword
This structure plan provides the foundation for the It is anticipated that the Murdoch Specialised Activity
long-term transformation of the health and education Centre could accommodate up to 35,000 workers,
precincts of Murdoch into an attractive, vibrant and 22,000 residents and 44,000 students, with Murdoch
accessible urban centre. University, Challenger Institute of Technology, St John
of God Hospital and the new Fiona Stanley Hospital all
This structure plan takes advantage of the co-location recognised as major employment generators.
of government and private institutions in the area
and delivers a clear vision for the centre’s future The structure plan is consistent with the State
development. Government’s Directions 2031 and Beyond strategy.
Development of the centre in accordance with
The opportunity to build stronger relationships and the structure plan will help meet the government’s
encourage more collaboration between the education employment and housing targets and will potentially
and health institutions has been identified to ensure contribute towards diversifying the Western Australian
Murdoch can evolve into a fully integrated and economy.
economically viable centre.
Murdoch is set to become a distinctive knowledge-
This planning framework looks at how to enable this based centre, combining specialised employment
by introducing two new mixed-use nodes that will in the areas of health, education and research with
unite the major institutions and provide shopping, residential and education opportunities in one place,
entertainment, residential and servicing opportunities while also activating the area so that it becomes an
that will benefit future workers, students and the wider interactive and vital location for the community
community. to enjoy.
The structure plan has been prepared through a
partnership between the Department of Planning, the
Western Australian Planning Commission, Murdoch
University and the City of Melville and included
substantial consultation with community, industry and
government stakeholders.
John Day MLA
Minister for Planning
Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre II
Structure Plan

Chairperson’s foreword
The Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre Structure Highlighting the opportunity for transit-oriented
Plan is a strategic land-use planning framework which development, not only around the train station but also
will guide the centre’s evolution to become one of near quality public transit routes, the structure plan
Perth’s largest and most unique activity centres. places a strong emphasis on accessibility.
The activity centre is set to become a unique Maintaining Murdoch’s natural bush setting as a key
knowledge precinct incorporating existing and characteristic of the centre has been a priority for the
proposed education and health institutions such as structure planning. A great deal of respect has been
Murdoch University and the new Fiona Stanley tertiary given to maintaining ecological linkages and wetlands
hospital, as well as a host of related commercial and for the flora and fauna that inhabit the area.
support services.
The structure plan will guide local and State
The Department of Planning, on behalf of the Western Government decisions for the centre, and provide the
Australian Planning Commission, has worked closely basis for more detailed local structure planning in the
with the City of Melville, Murdoch University and other future. It provides the planning direction necessary to
community, industry and government stakeholders to ensure that the future development of the centre will
investigate ways to maximise location and business be in keeping with the overall vision for the centre.
links between the various institutions, and to integrate
the centre with the wider community to form one
interconnected and accessible precinct.
The structure plan has been prepared in accordance
with State Planning Policy 4.2 - Activity Centres for
Perth and Peel – and, in addition to providing for
specialised employment, also considers the need Eric Lumsden PSM
for complementary types of land uses and activities Chairperson
expected in an urban style centre in a manner that will Western Australian Planning Commission
provide a high level of amenity and best serve workers,
residents, students and visitors.
III Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan

Summary
Murdoch Activity Centre with its existing collection of tertiary The character of the place and the spatial structure is
education institutions, hospitals, transport infrastructure and informed by the significant landscape setting in which
easily developable land presents an opportunity to become Murdoch sits. The Structure Plan adopts a landscape-
one of the largest centres of activity outside of the Perth led response to the ecological grain of the wider Beeliar
central business district (CBD). As a specialised centre with Regional Park. Within this framework, a precinct or centre-
considerable scope to grow, Murdoch has the opportunity wide approach to conserving natural resources can be
to provide up to 35,000 jobs in the longer term with nearly pursued to provide Murdoch with a sustainable basis for
44,000 students. growth.
There are significant opportunities for the centre based on The creation of eight precincts reflects the need for a
its potential attributes relating to bio-technology and health particular range of activities to make the centre function
research, to become a world leader in commercialisation of effectively. Each precinct will require a local structure plan to
research and also a significant contributor to the Western address detailed planning and design issues.
Australian economy.
A rezoning of the central area of Murdoch will need to occur
The availability of developable land and amenity provided to reflect its city centre potential and status. This will allow
by the natural environment presents one of Perth’s best the flexibility for the centre to respond effectively to market
locations to create quality high-density residential living and conditions and establish a framework for delivery.
help address the State’s long-term population pressures.
As an integrated centre, Murdoch will also contain all of Minimum intensity standards will be set to avoid the typical
the uses and activities of a city centre and achieve a high spacious layout of low density business parks which inhibits
intensity of employees, students and residents, in turn interaction between people and activities. These will restrict
driving the entertainment, transport and quality of place the footprint of buildings to promote the urban environment
attributes required for a successful centre. necessary to justify the required investment in transport
infrastructure.
There will be a dynamic shift in the approach to transport
planning and the introduction of major public transport A series of non-statutory planning studies are required to
trunk infrastructure in an east-west direction will transform explore and stimulate market investment in the area and
Murdoch from being an origin of public transport trips and turn Murdoch into a project to be built. These will assist
a redirector of traffic, to a centre which is both an origin and the economic development of the place and help set new
destination. environmental standards for the development of a major
urban centre.
The structural form of the centre focuses on the creation
of an intense core area which contains most of the urban The long-term expansion of Murdoch into a specialised
functions. This is supported by a transit corridor adjacent centre of optimal scale should be led by a new type of
to a high-frequency public transport route and a suburban partnership between government, industry, community and
frame which houses existing communities and, in the longer- Murdoch’s anchor institutions to promote the best interests
term, land capable of development within walking distance of all parties and generate innovative outcomes.
of the centre.
A summary of the key elements of the structure plan are
shown in the Structure Plan Key Diagram.
Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre IV
Structure Plan

Bateman
Bull Creek
Murdoch
Bull Creek
D R
E K
PRESCO
TT
D R Murdoch
South St Shopping Centre
A
L
H
University
T R O
N
Sho
K
p
a
p
r
in
d
g
in
C
ya
e ntre
Core Campus M
P
ix
re
e
c
d
i n
u
c
s
t
e Leeming
A
REL
A VE
K
Murdoch University
Kardinya D R
A
Western Precinct M
S
u
q
r
u
d
a
o
r
c
e
h M H u e r a d l o th ch
YLE
D
N
IW
Murdoch University w y
Eastern Precinct
M
ur d
oc h
Dr
K
wi n
a n a
F
Murdoch Training and
South Technology
(University) Murdoch Legend
South
(University) Activity Corridor Living Area
Farrington Rd Activity Centre Boundary Activity Nodes
Urban Core
City Centre
Conservation
Mixed Business
Murdoch
Parks and Recreation
South (Indicative POS plan) Education
North Lake Green Link Primary Regional
Road Reserve
Existing
Road Network PTA Car Park
Proposed
Road Network Major Intersection
Roe Hwy Proposed Rapid
transit route
Structure plan key diagram
V Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan

Contents
1. Introduction 1 4. Movement 49
1.1 About this structure plan 3 4.1 Metropolitan context 50
1.2 Status of this document 3 4.2 Regional connections 51
1.3 Purpose 3 4.3 Principal public transport services 52
1.4 How to use the Structure Plan Framework 4 4.4 Internal transit 54
1.5 Development opportunities and constraints 4 4.5 Local road network and access regime 57
4.6 Pedestrian and
1.6 Centre concept and vision 6
bicycle movement and amenity 60
1.8 Planning objectives
4.7 Parking strategy and travel management 63
for Murdoch Activity Centre 7
4.8 Vehicular access and mobility 66
2. Structure plan strategy 9 5. Urban form 71
2.1 Future scenarios for 5.1 Existing urban form 72
Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre 10
5.2 Proposed urban form 73
2.2 Profile of a specialised activity centre 11
5.3 Townscape typology and character 75
2.3 Spatial associations
5.4 Built form guidelines 79
within Murdoch Activity Centre 12
5.5 Architectural style 81
2.4 Proposed spatial structure 16
5.6 Street interface 83
2.5 Landscape structure and legibility 19
5.7 Street typologies 85
2.6 Precinct areas and guidelines 22
5.8 Public space 88
2.7 Prioritisation of intensity 27
2.8 Economic development strategy 30
3. Activity 31 6. Resource conservation 91
3.1 Activity anchor drivers 32 6.1 Key environmental issues 92
3.2 Employment targets 33 6.2 Energy generation and carbon control 94
3.3 Employment types 34 6.3 Green building credentials 96
3.4 Health 35 6.4 Materials and waste 97
3.5 Education and training 36 6.5 Water resources 98
3.6 Offices and service industry 38 6.6 Flora and fauna protection 100
3.7 Retail 39 6.7 Conservation areas
and other regional landscapes 101
3.8 Storage/distribution/other retail 42
6.8 Open space structure and links 102
3.9 Manufacturing/processing/fabrication 42
6.9 Embellishing cultural heritage 104
3.10 Primary agricultural/university 42
6.10 Further investigations 105
3.11 Community infrastructure 44
3.12 Utilities 45
3.13 Dwellings and resident population 46
Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre VI
Structure Plan

7. Implementation 107 List of figures
7.1 Statutory planning context 108 Figure 1.01: Murdoch in context of activity
centres in the central sub-region 2
7.2 Operation and implementation 108
Figure 1.02: Murdoch Activity Centre – site plan 5
7.3 Amendments to the
Metropolitan Region Scheme 108 Figure 1.03: Sketch concept of
Murdoch Activity Centre (view west) 6
7.4 Relationship to the local planning schemes 110
Figure 1.04: Aerial view of proposed
7.5 Improvement schemes and plans 112
Murdoch Activity Centre area 7
7.6 Local structure planning guidance 112
Figure 1.05: Murdoch Activity Centre area:
7.7 Development staging 112
scale comparison to Perth CBD 7
7.8 Transport infrastructure 116
Figure 2.01: Population scenarios
7.9 Road network 120 for Murdoch Activity Centre 10
7.10 Governance, Figure 2.02: St John of God Hospital
collaboration and incentivisation 121 – specialised services 11
7.11 Further studies 122 Figure 2.03: Murdoch University
7.12 Monitoring and review 124 – knowledge based activity 11
7.13 Key interventions and actions 125 Figure 2.04: Centre hierarchy (based on amended
map from Directions 2031 and Beyond) 13
Figure 2.05: Urbanisation nodes to support the
specialised activity (or localisation) nodes 14
References 127
Figure 2.06: Conceptual arrangement for mixed use
Key references 128
urban centre ‘Murdoch Square’
Glossary 130 to Perth CBD 14
Figure 2.07: Bendigo, Victoria – university town 15
Figure 2.08: Relationship of centre to transit 16
Figure 2.09: Urban core 17
Figure 2.10: Urban corridor 17
Figure 2.11: Urban frame 18
Figure 2.12: Conceptual growth of centre 19
Figure 2.13: Development of landscape
structure – north to south grain 20
Figure 2.14: Development of landscape
structure – east to west link 20
Figure 2.15: Development of landscape
structure – ecological corridors 21
Figure 2.16: Landscape spine 21
Figure 2.17: Activity centre precinct areas 22
Figure 2.18: Precincts 1 – 4 24
VII Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan

Figure 2.19: Precincts 5 – 8 26 Figure 4.06: Potential internal transit network 55
Figure 2.20: Murdoch Activity Centre Figure 4.07: Improve environment at
– urban core and central area 27 Murdoch Station for modal interchange 56
Figure 2.21: Activity concept for urban core 29 Figure 4.08: Recommended public
transport structure (principal routes) 58
Figure 3.01: Anchor drivers 32
Figure 4.09: Strategy for internal accessibility 59
Figure 3.02: Relative scale of employees
(by number within each node) 33 Figure 4.10: Pedestrian route types 61
Figure 3.03: Employee targets 34 Figure 4.11: Bicycle route hierarchy 61
Figure 3.04: Employment by type of activity 34 Figure 4.12: New pedestrian priority zones 62
Figure 3.05: Indicative employment Figure 4.13: Sections of Discovery Way
intensity and specialisation 35 to have limited vehicular access 62
Figure 3.06: Proposed principal health, Figure 4.14: Car park block layout guidelines 65
education and research zones 35
Figure 4.15: Park and ride at Murdoch Station 65
Figure 3.07: Projected students 36
Figure 4.16: Proposed major road network 66
Figure 3.08: Proposed education zones 37
Figure 4.17: Transport planning strategy 67
Figure 3.09: Education service providers 37
Figure 4.18: South Street northbound off-ramp 68
Figure 3.10: Capacity of commercial floorspace 38
Figure 4.19: Proposed freight movement 69
Figure 3.11: Office expansion areas 38
Figure 5.01: Fiona Stanley Hospital built form 72
Figure 3.12: Retail floorspace drivers (urban core) 39
Figure 5.02: Murdoch University built form 72
Figure 3.13: Range of retail floorspace (urban core) 39
Figure 5.03: Urban form concept diagram 73
Figure 3.14: Retail zones 40
Figure 5.04: Urban form spatial diagram 73
Figure 3.15: Agricultural uses 43
Figure 5.05: Murdoch Activity Centre
Figure 3.16: Community and government facilities 44 – urban form model 74
Figure 3.17: Utilities 45 Figure 5.06: Townscape typologies
– elevational section 76
Figure 3.18: Resident population capacity 46
Figure 5.07: Horizontal elevational form
Figure 3.19: Potetial resident population growth 46
– Subiaco, WA 76
Figure 3.20: Dwelling numbers 46
Figure 5.08: Vertical elevation form – Botany
Figure 3.21: Range of dwelling zones 47
Downs town centre, New Zealand 76
Figure 4.01: Proposed regional transit
Figure 5.09: Vertical forms with active ground floors
(optimal network connections to Murdoch) 50
– Perth CBD, WA 76
Figure 4.02: Murdoch Activity Centre spatial
Figure 5.10: Townscape section
relationship to other activity centres 51
across the activity centre 77
Figure 4.03: Murdoch Station
Figure 5.11: Key townscape elements 78
– key commuter and arrival gateway 52
Figure 5.12: Urban and campus block typologies 79
Figure 4.04: Potential alternative
Figure 5.13: Perspective view
public transport model 53
(west) of Murdoch Square 81
Figure 4.05: Potential district transit network 54
Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre VIII
Structure Plan

Figure 5.14: New buildings at Fiona Stanley Hospital Figure 7.01: Metropolitan Region Scheme zones
fronting Barry Marshall Parade 82 and reserved lands at Murdoch (existing) 110
Figure 5.15: Precinct character guidelines 82 Figure 7.02: Structure plan key diagram 111
Figure 5.16: Shade frontage treatment 83 Figure 7.03: Murdoch University 111
Figure 5.17: Fine grain built form 83 Figure 7.04: Indicative development
staging plan by precinct 115
Figure 5.18: Active urban edges 84
Figure 7.05: Artist’s impression of proposed
Figure 5.19: Indicative section for urban greenway
clinic at St John of God Hospital
(restricted traffic zone) 85
– view from Barry Marshall Parade 115
Figure 5.20: Alternative section through
Figure 7.06: Short-term
urban greenway (mixed traffic zone) 85
transport infrastructure 117
Figure 5.21: Illustration of urban greenway
Figure 7.07: Proposed mid-term
or active transit spine 85
transport infrastructure (uncommitted) 118
Figure 5.22: Perspective of traffic calmed
Figure 7.08: Proposed long-term
or shared street space 88
transport infrastructure (uncommitted) 119
Figure 5.23: Block access principles 88
Figure 5.24: Murdoch Square perspective
(looking west along Discovery Way) 89
List of tables
Figure 6.01: Gateway to Beeliar Regional Park 92
Table 2-1: Activity centre profile by employment type 11
Figure 6.02: Conservation landscapes,
parks and reserves 93 Table 2-2: Specialised centre proposition 12
Figure 6.03: Traffic on Kwinana Freeway at Murdoch 95 Table 2-3: Murdoch Activity Centre spatial intensity
(targets and capacities) 28
Figure 6.04: New Green Star code 96
Table 3-1: Retail development matrix 41
Figure 6.05: High quality building
design at Murdoch University 96 Table 5-1: Built form guidelines 80
Figure 6.06: Vacuum waste and recycling system Table 5-2: Urban street typologies 86
– Hammarby, Stockholm 97 Table 7-1: Statutory planning implementation 109
Figure 6.07: Bibra Lake wetland 98 Table 7-2: Precinct requirements summary 113
Figure 6.08: Point Fraser Table 7-3: Recommended further studies 123
– water-sensitive urban design 99
Figure 6.09: Sustainable urban drainage
– Bo01, Malmo, Sweden 99
Figure 6.10: Fiona Stanley Hospital
viewed from Murdoch University 100
Figure 6.11: Murdoch landscape frame concept 101
Figure 6.12: Strategic open space
and circulation structure 102
Figure 6.13: Beeliar Lake system 104
Figure 6.14: Quenda Wetland, Murdoch 105
IX Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan

Aerial photo of Fiona Stanley Hospital site (October 2013)
Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre X
Structure Plan

Murdoch
Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan
1. Introduction
1 Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan

Legend
Capital city
Strategic metropolitan
centre
Secondary centre
Specialised centre
Metropolitan attractor
Central sub-region
City of Melville
local government area
Figure 1.01: Murdoch in context of activity centres in the central sub-region (Source: Directions 2031)
Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre 2
Structure Plan

1. Introduction
1.1 About this structure plan 1.2 Status of this document
This structure plan has been commissioned by the Western This structure plan is based on a review of existing and
Australian Planning Commission (WAPC) to guide the emerging plans within the study area to ensure that
strategic development of the Murdoch Activity Centre. individual programs and proposals are consistent with
The WAPC is the statutory authority with statewide the strategic objectives of Directions 2031 and Beyond,
responsibilities for urban and regional land-use planning requirements of WAPC State Planning Policy 4.2 Activity
and land development matters. The WAPC is supported Centres for Perth and Peel, Western Australian Built
by the Department of Planning (DoP) which is the State Environment Policy Better Spaces and Places, Creating
Government’s primary planning agency for Western Places for People: an urban design protocol for Australian
Australia. cities, WAPC State Planning Strategy, Murdoch Activity
Centre Main Street and Mixed Use Precinct Detailed Area
The WAPC/DoP is responsible for ensuring that integrated Plan and Design Guidelines and the WAPC Development
land use and infrastructure planning is in place for Murdoch Control Policy 1.6 Planning to Support Transit Use and
which is identified as a significant ‘specialised centre’ and Transit-Oriented Development. This new structure plan for
transit-oriented development opportunity in the spatial Murdoch forms the principal planning and urban design
planning framework Directions 2031 and Beyond. Within this framework for the entire activity centre. Masterplans and
context, a primary objective of this structure plan is to align development applications for strategic sites within the
the current strategic and development plans of all Murdoch centre’s boundaries are required to be assessed against the
institutions and landholders to ensure the most efficient and objectives and guidelines within this structure plan. This is in
compatible use of land. Additionally, the WAPC/DoP has addition to the normal planning considerations set out in the
directed that the structure planning considers a relevant local or town planning scheme for the area.
long-term vision for the development of Murdoch Activity
Centre, promoting not just greater collaboration between This structure plan for the Murdoch Activity Centre
parties but innovation in the masterplanning of this supersedes the previous Murdoch Activity Centre Structure
activity centre as a major knowledge based export hub in Plan (Part A – Fiona Stanley Hospital and Health Precinct)
conjunction with the existing regionally significant institutional 2007.
activities. It is important to note that the success of the
structure plan will be dependent on the delivery of key
transport infrastructure to ensure it functions at an optimum.
1.3 Purpose
The goal of innovative masterplanning has been embraced in
The purpose of the structure plan is to set a framework
the strategies developed in the structure plan. Innovation is
which facilitates the future development of Murdoch as
not simply about a creative physical design or land use plan
a specialised centre. In response to this objective, the
for the study area. It encompasses the critical interventions
document has been generated to determine a capacity of
and actions required to bring about a significant change
development. The calculations which form the basis of the
in the integrated planning of the centre, the outlook of key
capacity are subject to detailed studies which will be specific
partners and development outcomes on the ground. The
to the activities which occur in the future. This document
aim, therefore, has not been to seek to prepare a standard
shall guide the decision-making process of the responsible
spatially based structure plan but to fashion a new type of
authority.
strategic document, properly informed by the economic
realities and opportunities at Murdoch and shaped by the
environmental character and sensitivities of the place.
3 Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan

11.. IInnttrroodduuccttiioonn
1.4 How to use the 1.5 Development
structure plan framework opportunities and constraints
The structure plan is set out in seven chapters. The opening The background analysis of the current conditions and
two chapters set the planning context and overall strategies prospects for the centre have revealed both unique
which shape the plan, with the detail fleshed out by topic in opportunities and significant challenges to the overall vision
the remaining sections. The introduction provides a review of a major specialised centre being developed that is second
of findings from the analysis and consultation stages of the to none in the State of Western Australia. These challenges
project. involve finding ways to:
• achieve true diversity of use within a mono-use
Chapters 3 to 7 are in a format consistent with the five
landscape, much of which is in the control of State
key topics of activity centre planning as outlined in State
Government;
Planning Policy 4.2: activity; movement; urban form;
resource conservation; and implementation. Chapter 7 • attract the specialised investment and commercial
includes guidance to local authorities and other agencies buy-in to the overall concept of the centre within a
on the planning provisions required to support the structure traditional resource based economy;
plan proposals, including recommended amendments
• engender a compact, dense urban culture, active day
to relevant statutory documents and arrangements for
and night, in a largely untested suburban location;
managing, staging and funding development.
• deliver a residential density and genuinely affordable
The structure plan is a strategic planning document which urban housing within the conditions of the Perth
should be used to guide major decisions about forward property market;
planning within the activity centre. It is therefore applicable
• ensure high quality public realm is provided
to the content of the Metropolitan Region Scheme, town
appropriate to the location and the Western
planning schemes, campus masterplans, site development
Australian climate;
applications or proposals for new transport infrastructure.
• encourage more people out of cars and induce a step
This structure plan has been designed as more than a change in public transport patronage in a roads/car
land-use planning document. It has been led by economic park dominant environment;
analysis and informed by a thorough consultation process
• responsibly conserve and integrate the natural habitat
with a range of key stakeholders in public, private and
within a developing urban context; and
community sectors. It therefore contains intelligence and
strategies about other elements that are required to be • foster a resource conscious culture across the
addressed if the structure planning vision for the activity organisations in the activity centre with respect to
centre is to be realised. water, energy and waste.
In addition, a series of recommendations are made about This structure plan does not set out to address wider social,
specific actions and governance structures necessary to economic and environmental challenges but it does highlight
implement key parts of the strategy for the activity centre. their existence and relevance and offers some strategies to
Without these interventions, the potential of the activity assist with delivering the overall plan for the centre.
centre to fulfil stakeholder aspirations and government
targets as a significant and specialised urban centre will be
compromised.
Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre 4
Structure Plan

Harold Field Bert Jeffrey
Reserve Kardinya Park
Primary Murdoch Bateman d a Bull Creek
School o R
d
South Street M P u a r r r k ay B S u h l o l p C p re in e g k le fi g n Noel Kroll
Morris Buzacott Centre in Reserve
n
Reserve e
B
Murdoch Train
Station Retirement William
Murdoch Quenda Park’n’Ride Homes Hall
Murdoch University College Wetland Proposed Cedric Park
Campus Mixed-Use Smith Park
St John
(Academic Core) of God Precinct
Murdoch Wesfarmers Hospital
University
Student Animal
Village Paddocks Dudley Hartree
St Ives Park
y
Kardinya
Retirement Village
Chelodina P
A
ad
n
d
im
oc
a
k
l
s P W oli A ce
Fio
H
n
o
a
s
S
p
t
i
a
ta
n
l
ley
ur a h
R
ail
w a
Calley
Drive
P
W
ri
e
m
s
a
t
r
L
y
e e
Sc
m
h
i
o
n
o
g
l
Fi n dl
ay
R o a
d
Leeming
B
H
P
a
a
a
k
r
r
e
r
k
y
r
Wetland Station n d
a
Murdoch University Reserve Fire M
Sports Fields Environmental Station h- Peter
Tec
C
h
e
n
n
o
tr
lo
e
gy
P
ert Bosci Park
Kennedy Challenger Institute d
Baptist College State Animal of Technology a n Leeming
Resource Centre y High
W
R
B o
e
a o
s
n d
e
k
r
l s a
v
i n a
e
d & Veterinary Farm
M
ur d oc h
Dri v e
Re
W
in Fa t
a
e c
n
g i
d
l r it a
o
y ti
o
o n
O
M
p
C
e
i e
r
t l
a
y v
ti
i o l
o
l f e
ns K
wi n a n a
Fr e e w a
Aulberry
Parade L
S
e
c
e
h
m
o
i
o
n
l
g
L P S e r
M
c e i
H
m h m
o
o
i
a
l
n
i
l
o n r
t
P
l y g
a
a
g
r
u
k
e
North Lake L G iv r e a s z t i o n c g k M S e w la a l m eu p ca W P e o s w te e r r n L E a n u s n i d gn ry Centre Re C c e re n a tr ti e on
Reserve Sub Services
Station
Leeming
Forum
Farrington Road iFAP
Training
Beeliar Regional Park Lakeside Spanish Centre
Recreation Club
Centre
v e Douglas
Dri Freeman
a Murdoch Park
Bi
br
Pines
Golf Club
Brandwood
Reserve
Bibra Lake North Lake
Figure 1.02: Murdoch Activity Centre - Site Plan
5 Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan

11.. IInnttrroodduuccttiioonn
1.6 Centre concept and vision An overall vision for the activity centre was formed with
input from the community and stakeholders. During the
Murdoch Activity Centre is one of five specialised activity consultation program, the project team worked through a
centres in Perth with the potential to become a knowledge- number of conceptual options for the centre and, based on
intensive and competitive urban centre, one which is feedback, developed a preferred concept plan (Figure 1.03).
government led, market driven, sustainably designed
and innovatively managed. Based around core activities The vision statement for Murdoch Activity Centre
of health, education and research and located at the is as follows.
intersection of key transport arteries, Murdoch presents an
unparalleled opportunity to develop a specialised centre Murdoch will become a centre of innovation and
which can assist in diversifying the Western Australian sustainability and a workplace and home for a diverse
economy. population of 35,000 employees, 22,000 residents and
44,000 students. At its core will be a thriving university
The concept of developing a major activity centre at town with high class research, teaching of international
Murdoch to serve the metropolitan area is not without reputation and a variety of complementary tenants all
foundation, as the idea can be traced back to strategic sharing amenities in an integrated campus environment.
planning by the Western Australian Government in the 1950s Murdoch Square will be the centrepiece, containing low-
and 60s. However, even with substantial public investment in cost accommodation around a new shopping, leisure
the area in recent decades, the vision for the centre remains and community precinct. Murdoch Activity Centre
unfulfilled and in need of fresh impetus. will have world class health care facilities, Australia’s
largest hospital and an intense mix of
export-oriented business, research and
development and other key services.
The mixed use precinct will be the
gateway to the centre featuring a lively
mix of apartments, offices, shopping and
entertainment uses. In the backdrop, the
wider Beeliar Regional Park is a unique
setting for an active urban life within a
compact core served by intercity trains
and other rapid transit as the centre
transforms into a distinctive Western
Australian destination.
The structure plan is also cognisant of
key outcomes and interventions required
to help deliver on the vision for this major
centre and this is addressed in Chapter 7:
Implementation.
Figure 1.03: Sketch concept of Murdoch Activity Centre - core area (view west)
Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre 6
Structure Plan

1.7 Planning objectives Beyond and gives consideration to ultimate development
scenarios agreed by stakeholders. The structure plan is
for Murdoch Activity Centre
robust enough to accommodate longer-term transformation,
including potential infrastructure requirements in support of
The planning objectives which underpin and are now driving an optimum scale activity centre.
the ambitions for the centre are as follows.
1. A major urban centre with one of the highest levels
of activity and employment outside the Perth CBD.
2. A national centre for excellence in health,
education and commercialisation of
knowledge.
3. An affordable, attractive and convenient
community in which to live, including
low-cost and higher-density forms of
accommodation, e.g. for students,
workers, retirees and those in health
care.
4. A well connected centre, not just to
Perth CBD but to other city centres,
specialised centres and activity centres
within the metropolitan area.
5. An Australian model for moving around
a centre via sustainable urban transport
Figure 1.04: Aerial view of proposed Murdoch Activity Centre
forms.
study area
6. A leader in place making that will set a
new benchmark for the integration of
an urban centre with a sensitive natural
environment.
7. A new standard for conserving
resources on a centre-wide basis.
The WAPC/DoP acknowledges the urgency of
completing the strategic planning framework
for Murdoch Activity Centre given the proposed
2014 opening date for Fiona Stanley Hospital.
This structure plan therefore provides detailed
guidance and recommendations relating to
the provision of infrastructure for short-term
(1-5 years) and medium-term (5-10 years) time
frames. The structure plan also works within
the 20-year horizon of Directions 2031 and
Figure 1.05: Murdoch Activity Centre study area: scale comparison
to Perth CBD
7 Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre
Structure Plan

Murdoch Specialised Activity Centre 8
Structure Plan