Department of Planning,
Lands and Heritage
Operational
Policy 2.2
Residential Subdivision
May 2024
The Western Australian Planning Disclaimer © State of Western Australian website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
Commission acknowledges the This document has been published by the Western Australian Published by the email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
traditional owners and custodians of Planning Commission. Any representation, statement, opinion or Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002
this land. We pay our respect to Elders advice expressed or implied in this publication is made in good faith Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
past and present, their descendants and on the basis that the Government, its employees and agents are 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
who are with us today, and those who not liable for any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as Perth WA 6000 This document is available in
will follow in their footsteps. a result of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect Locked Bag 2506 alternative formats on application to
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred to Perth WA 6001 the Communications Branch.
herein. Professional advice should be obtained before applying the Publication date: 31 May 2024
information contained in this document to particular circumstances. Operational date: 31 May 2024

Operational
Policy 2.2
Residential Subdivision
Contents
Background notes 1
1. Citation 1
2. Introduction 1
3. Policy objectives 2
4. Policy measures 2
4.1 General requirements 2
4.2 Lot sizes 3
4.3 Single residential lots 4
4.4 Small residential lots 4
4.5 Battleaxe subdivision 5
4.6 Vehicle access to residential lots 6
4.7 Provision of screen fencing 7
4.8 Utility service provision 7

Operational Policy 2.2
1
Residential Subdivision
Background notes Operational Policy 1.1 — Subdivision of Land - 2. Introduction
General Principles
1. Operational Policy 2.2 — Residential
This policy sets out the Western Australian Planning
Subdivision establishes the Western Australian Development Control Policy 1.3 — Strata Titles
Commission’s requirements for the subdivision
Planning Commission (WAPC) position on
of land into residential lots. It is related to the
Development Control Policy 1.7 — General
residential subdivision. The policy considers
site area per dwelling standards contained in the
Road Planning
the Residential Design Codes (R-Codes) and
R-Codes Volume 1; and to other WAPC policies
other relevant WAPC policiess. Development Control Policy 2.3 — Public Open outlined in Background notes. It is intended that,
Space in Residential Areas when read together, these policies create a flexible
2. This policy complements and is to be read in
framework for the use of statutory planning powers
conjunction with the following relevant policies Development Control Policy 2.4 — School Sites
within which the creation of a wide range of lot and
and planning instruments:
Development Control Policy 2.6 — Residential housing types is possible.
State Planning Policy 2.6 — State Coastal Road Planning
Planning R-Codes Volume 1 Part D Clause 1.1 C1.1.1 to
Position Statement — Special Residential Zone C1.1.6 and Table D outlines minimum and average
State Planning Policy 3.6 —Infrastructure
site area provisions and adjustments applied to
Contributions Government Sewerage Policy
determine the number of dwellings on a site for
development proposals and are not able to be
State Planning Policy 3.7 — Planning in Bushfire
varied except for aged and dependent persons
Prone Areas
1. Citation dwellings, single bedroom dwellings, accessible
State Planning Policy 4.2 – Activity Centres dwellings and small dwellings.
This is an Operational Policy prepared under
State Planning Policy 5.4 — Road and Rail Noise
Section 14(b)(ii) of the Planning and Development Minimum, average and battle-axe lot sizes and
Act 2005. frontages outlined in R-Codes Table D are
Liveable Neighbourhoods (to be replaced by
applied to determine number of lots on a site for
State Planning Policy 7.1 – Neighbourhood
This policy is cited as Operational Policy 2.2 — subdivision proposals and may be varied only by
Design)
Residential Subdivision (OP 2.2). the WAPC as outlined under R-Codes Volume 1
State Planning Policy 7.2 – Precinct Design Part D Clause 1.1 P1.1.2 and/or in this policy.
Residential Design Codes (R-Codes) Volumes 1
Historical lot size differences and application of
and 2
contemporary R-Codings results in some lots not
aligning with allocated R-Code minimum and
average lot sizes. Lot size variation under this
Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2024

Operational Policy 2.2
2
Residential Subdivision
policy is intended to facilitate flexibility to complete to satisfy policy criteria and/or to increase the total • the context of the general subdivision
subdivision of these lots as intended under the lot size/subdivision application area to comply with the context of the general subdivision
local planning framework. the required average lot size is not a legitimate requirements of Operational Policy
purpose. 1.1 - Subdivision of Land - General
This policy is not to be used to circumvent the Principles
R-Coding of land to facilitate subdivision and
• state and local planning frameworks,
increased density not intended under local
3. Policy objectives
including (but not limited to):
planning frameworks.
3.1. To establish a consistent and coordinated - Liveable Neighbourhoods (to be
Nested subdivision proposals involve the inclusion
approach to the creation of residential lots replaced by State Planning Policy 7.1
of two or more original/parent lots and/or minor
throughout Western Australia. – Neighbourhood Design)
boundary adjustments between them to achieve
the average lot size requirement. - State Planning Policy 7.2 – Precinct
3.2. To adopt criteria for residential lots that
Design
will ensure each lot has a suitable level of
Staged or successive subdivision proposals involve
the creation of one minimum sized lot under amenity, services and access. - Residential Design Codes – Volumes
separate subdivision applications in order to 1 and 2
3.3. To facilitate the supply of residential lots
obtain increased lot yield. For example, a 1,000m2
in regular shapes and size ranges that • water sensitive urban design (WSUD)
site coded R40 (minimum 180m2 and average
reflect the statutory provisions of local principles.
220m2 lot size) yields 4 lots. Staged or successive
planning schemes — including the R-Codes,
subdivision could yield 5 lots through individual Conditions of approval may also be
the availability of reticulated sewerage,
separate subdivision applications of the original lot imposed to ensure compliance with
electricity and water and the need for
through creation of minimum 180m2 lots. 1000m2 this policy.
frontage to public streets for access.
- 180sqm (lot 1) = 820sqm. 820m2 -180m2 (lot 2)
4.1.2 If the WAPC considers that a subdivision
= 640m2. 640m2 - 180m2 (lot 3) = 460m2. 460m2
application may affect a local government,
divided by 220m2 - (lot 4 & 5).
4. Policy measures a public authority or utility service provider,
it is required under the Planning and
Nested and staged/successive subdivision
Development Act 2005 (as amended) to
proposals are not generally supported. Where 4.1 General requirements
consult with, and consider the advice of the
proposed, the applicant must provide justification
and information to demonstrate legitimacy. 4.1.1 Applications for the subdivision of land into local government and any relevant public
A determinable difference between existing and residential lots will be assessed against: bodies and government departments
before making a decision on the
proposed new lots must be demonstrated and
• criteria set out in clause 4.1.3 subdivision application.
the proposal must not compromise the R-Coding.
Inclusion of lot/s not resulting in substantial change,
Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2024

Operational Policy 2.2
3
Residential Subdivision
4.1.3 All new residential lots will be: and having regard for the existing and 4.2.2. In areas subject to a Precinct or Standard
proposed distribution of open space in Structure Plan, the WAPC may consider
• capable of development in accordance
the immediate locality subdivision applications with lot sizes for
with the R-Code density assigned
single houses below the minimum for the
under the relevant local planning • served by a suitable level of community
relevant R-Code, provided the subdivision
scheme, and any local variations that services, schools, retail and other
achieves the average for the relevant
may apply under the local planning facilities and services as determined
R-Code.
framework under Liveable Neighbourhoods (to be
replaced by State Planning Policy 7.1 4.2.3. For the purpose of calculating average
• located in an area with physical
– Neighbourhood Design) and other lot size specified in Table D or elsewhere
characteristics suitable for subdivision
relevant WAPC policies in the R-Codes Volume 1, the WAPC
(such as topography, soils, drainage,
accepts that with many large-scale projects,
vegetation and natural features) • The WAPC may require lot
subdivisions will proceed in stages,
reconfiguration to facilitate retention of
following a structure plan for the locality or
• located within a system of vehicle
significant trees and mature vegetation.
district, and that component stages may not
and pedestrian movement
separately comply with the average lot size
consistent with the principles of • Subdivision proposals proximate
requirement. In such cases, the WAPC may
Liveable Neighbourhoods (to be to specified road and rail transport
choose to base the required calculation
replaced by State Planning Policy corridors are to address the
upon subdivision of the entire project area
7.1 – Neighbourhood Design), State requirements in SPP 5.4 Road and Rail
provided that where a particular stage
Planning Policy 7.2 – Precinct Design Noise.
does not comply, it can be assured that
and Development Control Policy 2.6 —
subsequent stages will restore compliance,
Residential Road Planning, in terms of
and that those stages will be completed
street hierarchy, safety, lot access and 4.2 Lot sizes
within a reasonable period of time.
provision of cycleways and pedestrian
4.2.1 The minimum and average lot size and
walkways
4.2.4. In existing residential areas, the WAPC will
frontage requirements of the relevant
only consider subdivision or survey-strata
• convenient to areas of passive and R-Code form the basis for the subdivision
applications proposing variations to lot sizes
active open space in accordance of residential land. Lot sizes greater than
below the minimum and average site area
with Liveable Neighbourhoods (to the specified minimum will be considered
requirements specified in R-Codes Volume
be replaced by State Planning Policy unless, having regard for the reasons for
1 Table D or elsewhere in the R-Codes for
7.1 – Neighbourhood Design), State the selection of the particular R-Code
non-battleaxe configured lots, where the
Planning Policy 7.2 – Precinct Design and any commitments made to service
following criteria are met:
and Development Control Policy infrastructure, the uneconomic use of
2.3 — Public Open Space, in terms of services or under achievement of WAPC
appropriate location and configuration, density targets would result.
Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2024

Operational Policy 2.2
4
Residential Subdivision
a) Variations to minimum and average lot undertaken with the local government - the width and frontage of the
size up to five per cent criteria
before the application is determined new lots will enable dwellings to
by the WAPC. have their primary frontage to the
• the proposal satisfies the relevant
different streets.
design principles of the R-Codes
Volume 1 Part D, clause 1.1 Site Area. b) Variations to average lot size greater - crossovers and driveways to
than five per cent criteria
proposed lots are provided in
• the minimum lot size variation only
applies to one lot in the subdivision. • In addition to the criteria at 4.2.4(a), accordance with Australian Standard
any average lot size variation greater (AS) 2890 and the R-Codes Volume 1.
• the variation reduces the area of that than five per cent meets all of the
- any corner truncation, pedestrian
one lot by no more than five per cent following criteria:
access way, vehicle right of way or
of the minimum lot size specified
in R-Codes Volume 1 Table D or - a single residential coding of R10 to laneway widening is excluded from
elsewhere in the R-Codes. R35 applies to the land. the calculation of the minimum lot
size.
Note: For dual coded land, the
• the variation in the area of that one
variation is only applicable to the base
lot reduces the average lot size of the
overall subdivision by no more than coding. 4.3 Single residential lots
five per cent of the average lot size - the site is a corner lot with frontage
4.3.1 Single residential lots are square or
specified in the R-Codes Volume 1
to two different streets or any other
rectangular in shape, with preferably a
Table D or elsewhere in the R-Codes.
lot with frontage to more than
greater depth than width to maximise
one dedicated street (excluding a
• in considering lot size and frontage space for outdoor living, gardens and trees,
primary (red), other regional (blue)
variations, the WAPC will give regard privacy, amenity and street frontage. WAPC
or any other major road, including
to the recommendations of the local will consider lot shapes, having regard to
state and federal highways, with
government. effective lot area, existing and prevailing
access restrictions).
lot configurations, site circumstances, solar
• where a local government objects to
- all proposed lots comply with the access, streetscape, retention of existing
a variation, the objection should be
dwellings and retention of existing mature
minimum lot size and frontage
supported by reasons, with reference
trees.
requirements specified in the
to the provisions in this policy.
R-Codes Volume 1 Table D.
• where a local government objects
4.4 Small residential lots
to a variation and the WAPC is of
the view the application should be
4.4.1 Deleted by amendment dated 10 April
supported, further consultation may be
2024.
Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2024

Operational Policy 2.2
5
Residential Subdivision
4.5 Battleaxe subdivision criteria • retention of existing heritage or 4.5.6. In locations not subject to the provisions
character development. of the R-Codes, the WAPC will normally
4.5.1 ‘Battleaxe lot’ and ‘effective lot area’ are
require residential battleaxe lots to have
defined in the R-Codes as follows: • retention of verge trees where
an effective lot area of at least 850m2 to
recommended by the local
overcome the sense of confinement from
• Battleaxe lot - a single house lot
government.
lack of street frontage.
that has a frontage for purposes of
servicing and access to a public road 4.5.3 Where opportunities exist to dedicate
4.5.7. A battleaxe leg should be a minimum of:
only through a strip of connecting land existing laneways and rights-of-way
containing a pedestrian access leg as public streets — both as a means of • 4 metres in width (R2-R40); or,
and/ or vehicular access way that is providing alternative access and a street
• 3.6 metres in width (R50 and higher);
part of the lot. The term excludes a site aspect, this is a preferred lot configuration
that has vehicle access from a private outcome.
to allow for a 3m constructed driveway,
or communal street or right-of-way
landscaping space and the necessary
4.5.4. Where local government considers
connected to a public road.
public utility services. Where a battleaxe
battleaxe subdivisions are likely to seriously
lot is to be created for or is of a size
• Effective lot area – that part of the lot threaten the character of an established
capable of further subdivision for five or
that is capable of development and residential area that ought to be protected
more grouped or multiple dwellings, the
excludes any vehicle or pedestrian (for example, heritage precincts or special
WAPC may require the width of the leg
access legs and associated truncations. design control areas) density controls may
to be increased to provide for passing
be included in local planning schemes, or
4.5.2 Use of battleaxe lot configuration is not points. Driveways may be required to be
development controls introduced through
favoured. Direct street frontage or dual constructed and drained as a condition of
local planning policy or local development
street and rear laneway access is the subdivision approval in accordance with
plans to ensure that battleaxe subdivisions
preferred configuration. Exceptions may be the specification of the local government
and development is in keeping with their
considered in the following circumstances: and may be bonded to facilitate future
surroundings. Provisions should take
construction post dwelling construction.
into account the character and built form
• battleaxe legs used to provide
outcome of the area.
alternative access for lots fronting 4.5.8. In rural, rural-residential and low-density
major roads with access controls or (R2-R25) subdivisions requiring long
4.5.5. The minimum battleaxe lot area will be
public open space. battleaxe legs, and locations where there
as set out in the R-Codes Volume 1 Part
are particular physical or topographical
D clause 1.1 and Table D. The WAPC will
• to facilitate vehicular access to
constraints, the WAPC, on the advice of the
not permit reductions in the minimum or
significantly sloping sites where
local government, may require a battleaxe
average lot sizes for battleaxe lots.
acceptable street gradient can not be
achieved.
Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2024

Operational Policy 2.2
6
Residential Subdivision
leg wider than 4 metres. The SPP 3.7 on major roads and where non visually 4.6.2. For lots without street frontage, vehicular
Planning in Bushfire Prone Areas specifies permeable street walls and fences exist, access should be provided in accordance
where battleaxe lots should be avoided. to improve visibility for vehicles, cyclists with the following:
and pedestrians. The WAPC will give
4.5.9. In cases where battleaxe legs are adjoining, • Battleaxe lots to be provided with an
particular regard to the advice of the local
the WAPC may accept a reduced width access leg in accordance with sections
government on these requirements.
for each leg, subject to the subdivider 4.5.7-4.5.12 of this policy.
entering into an agreement with the local 4.5.13. The WAPC requires proposals for the
• Non-battleaxe lots provided with
government to ensure reciprocal rights of creation of battle-axe lots for residential
access in accordance with the R-Codes
access over adjoining battle-axe legs. purposes to comply with this policy.
Volume 1 Part B Clause 5.3.5 or Part
The reciprocal rights should also extend The WAPC may permit variations upon the
C Clause 3.7 depending on R-Coding
into the effective lot areas to allow for a advice of the relevant local government,
and dwelling type.
shared turning area. public bodies and government
departments, and where it is satisfied that
• For survey strata lots proposing a
4.5.10. Battleaxe arrangements involving more
such variations would be consistent with
shared access, the communal street
than two access legs will not be accepted
orderly and proper planning.
is shown as common property
unless there are exceptional circumstances
and includes the driveway, side lot
to justify such an arrangement. Where
boundary landscaping and all lot
more than two adjoining battle-axe legs are
4.6 Vehicle access to residential lots
truncations for vehicle manoeuvring
proposed, access should be provided by
and sight lines in accordance with the
way of a constructed street. 4.6.1 The creation of lots having dual street
R-Codes Volume 1. The communal
vehicle access and frontage is not generally
4.5.11. The WAPC will not accept undersized street must be designed to allow
favoured, although exceptions may be
battleaxe legs as a means of obtaining vehicles to pass in opposite directions
made if the proposed lot is specifically
alternative street frontage and to avoid the at one or more points where five or
designed for multiple or grouped
costs of extending a water main or sewer in more dwellings are served by the
dwelling development and the proposal is
accordance with normal requirements. driveway in accordance with the
consistent with the operational and safety
R-Codes Volume 1.
requirements of the abutting streets and
4.5.12. A 3 x 3 metre truncation of 4.24 metres may
relevant R-Code provisions.
be required at the point where the access • Where it is proposed to retain an
leg joins the effective area of the lot, for existing dwelling and access is by
vehicular access and manoeuvrability. A 1.5 communal street or battleaxe leg, the
x 1.5 metre truncation of 2.12 metres may WAPC, in considering any subdivision
be required at the point where the access will generally require that:
leg meets the street reserve, particularly
Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2024

Operational Policy 2.2
7
Residential Subdivision
- there should be no eaves overhangs • substantially of solid construction subdivisions, including strata titled, unless
or other protrusions into the to 1.2 metres in height and visually the exemptions as specified in that policy
driveway (although there may be permeable to a maximum height apply.
overhang or protrusions into the (between 1.8 metres and 2.4 metres)
4.8.2. Where the WAPC is prepared to approve
landscaping areas).
• of materials or finished treatment new residential lots without sewerage, it will
- there will be adequate space for the to give a long-lasting, aesthetic need to be satisfied that an on-site effluent
car parking required by the R-Codes appearance, preferably with a low disposal system is provided in accordance
Volume 1, and sufficient space for maintenance and graffiti reduction with current policy requirements and
safe vehicle manoeuvring. factor complemented with landscaping practice.
• of uniform height, design and 4.8.3. The WAPC recognises that considerable
materials with adjacent lots and of advantages are gained in the provision
4.7 Provision of screen fencing
compatible design and/or materials of reticulated underground power in
4.7.1 Where lots are being created with rear or where changes in design or height are residential subdivision, including improved
side boundaries that abut public reserves justified due to the requirements of aesthetics, safer and more reliable power
— particularly major streets to which the topography or to relieve monotony supply, greater flexibility in road design and
lots have no access — passive surveillance, lower maintenance costs. Therefore, as
• of sufficient height and strength and
amenity and user safety of those reserves part of its consideration of applications for
of appropriate design where it is
is best protected by the provision of subdivision, the WAPC will normally require
necessary to produce a barrier for
uniform visually permeable fencing along the provision of underground power to
safety and security.
the common boundary. Arrangements for residential lots, with regard to the advice of
such fencing should be made at the time of the relevant licensed service provider.
4.7.3 Deleted by amendment dated 10 April
subdivision. A condition of subdivision may
2024
require the subdivider to reach agreement
with the local government on fencing
to include such matters as specification,
4.8 Utility service provision
complementary landscaping and the timing
of its provision. 4.8.1 The WAPC will apply the Government
Sewerage Policy in its consideration of
4.7.2. The suitability of fences for given locations
applications for the creation of residential
will depend on function, setting and any
lots in unsewered areas. The basis of
local planning framework requirements.
that policy is the mandatory provision of
If the local planning framework does not
reticulated sewerage to all new residential
outline specific standards, the fences will
be:
Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2024