=== PAGE 1 ===
POLICY
Title: RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT Code: LP.01
1. Ensure setbacks and buildings built up to boundaries do not have an adverse
impact on the amenity of the adjoining property.
2. Enable trees worthy of retention to be retained on site and be integrated into
developments through site specific street setback and lot boundary building
setbacks.
3. Improve the visual appeal of developments facing public spaces.
4. Outbuildings that do not detract from the streetscape or the visual amenity of
Objectives:
residents or neighbouring properties.
5. Ensure rubbish collection areas can be accessed by service vehicles, sufficient
space for storage of bulk bins and to ensure that bin areas are screened from the
street.
6. Ensure sea containers do not adversely impact the visual amenity of residential
areas.
7. Provide for sustainability measures to be considered in new developments.
Policy Statement
This policy supplements the provisions of the Residential Design Codes for residential development.
1 Definitions
Unless otherwise defined below, words and expressions in this policy are as defined in Part 6 of Local Planning Scheme
No. 42 (the Scheme), the Planning and Development Act 2005, the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015 (Regulations) or Residential Design Codes Volume 1 (R-Codes).
Sea container A shipping container, or similar, rectangular in shape and made of steel which
generally is used for the purposes of freight and transporting cargo and for non-
habitable purposes.
Skillion roof A wide, flat and gently sloping type of roof with the higher side commonly attached
to the wall or fascia of a building.
Tree worthy of retention A tree that:
a) Is equal to or in excess of 3m in height; or
b) Has a trunk equal to or in excess of 100mm in diameter (sum of 200mm
diameter for multiple trunk species) measured at 1.4m above ground
level; or
c) Has a canopy spread of 3m or more; or
d) A Grass Tree
City of Canning Policy LP.01 – Residential Development Page 1 of 9
=== PAGE 2 ===
Uniform Fencing A fence located to the side or rear lot boundary of a site that is:
a) Abutting a Metropolitan Region Scheme Reserve or a Local Reserve,
including but not limited to: a school, Public Open Space Reserve,
Drainage Reserve, Pedestrian Access Way or a Railway Reservation, and
a primary or Other Regional Road Reservation (major transport corridor);
b) is constructed of reconstituted stone block, brick, masonry or other
materials such as using modular construction with a rendered or similar
finish, to the satisfaction of the City; and
c) has a maximum height of 1800mm (or a maximum height of 2100mm
where required for as an acoustic mitigation measure along major
transport corridors) above natural ground level.
2 Policy Statement
2.1 How this Policy is to be applied.
a) This policy applies to all development which Residential Design Codes Volume 1 apply.
b) This policy supplements the Residential Design Codes Volume 1 by;
i. Augmenting or replacing Deemed-to-Comply provisions of the Residential Design Codes to provide added
design flexibility;
ii. Clarification of development standards that the City considers acceptable to satisfy ‘Deemed-to Comply’ of the
Residential Design Codes Volume 1; and
iii. Identifying certain works affiliated with residential land that do not require a development approval.
c) To ensure that new lots can be developed in accordance with this policy, the City will also consider this policy when
making recommendations to the Western Australian Planning Commission on residential subdivisions.
d) Any variations to this Policy will be assessed by the City against the objectives of this Policy and the relevant design
principles and objectives of the Residential Design Codes Volume 1 where applicable.
3 Provisions
3.1 R-CODES PART B CLAUSE 5.1.2 Street Setbacks is amended to include:
C2.1 Buildings, excluding carports, porches, balconies, verandahs, or equivalent, set back from the primary
street boundary:
iii. Reduced by up to 50 per cent provided that the area of any building, including a garage encroaching into
the setback area, is compensated for by:
a. At least an equal area of open space that is located between the street setback line and a line drawn
parallel to it at twice the setback distance, (refer Part B Figure 2a and 2c), or,
b. Where a tree worthy of retention is retained between the street setback line and twice the setback
distance with a minimum of 9m² (minimum dimension 3m) of deep soil area (refer figure 1).
3.2 R-CODES CLAUSE PART B 5.1.3 Lot Boundary Setbacks is amended to include:
C3.2 Boundary walls may be built behind the street setback (specified in Table B and in accordance with clauses 5.1.2 and
5.2.1), within the following limits and subject to the overshadowing provisions of clause 5.4.2 and Part B Figure Series 11:
v. The maximum length to one boundary wall can be increased by up to 3m where a tree worthy of retention
is retained with a minimum of 9m2 (minimum dimension 3m) of deep soil area and is located behind twice
the setback distance (refer figure 2).
vi. For lots with 12m frontage or less, a boundary wall can be built within the primary street setback area,
where a tree worthy of retention is retained in accordance Clause 5.1.2 C2.1 iii b, subject to the following;
a. The finish of the boundary wall (colours & materials) in the primary street setback area is to be of a
similar standard to the rest of the front façade (refer figure 3).
City of Canning Policy LP.01 Residential Development Page 2 of 9
=== PAGE 3 ===
3.3 R-CODES PART B CLAUSE 5.2.1 Setback of carports and garages is amended to include:
C1.1 Garages set back 4.5m from the primary street except that the setback may be reduced:
i. In accordance with Part B Figure 8b where the garage adjoins a dwelling provided the garage is at least 0.5m
behind the dwelling alignment (excluding any porch, verandah or balcony); or
ii. To 3m where the garage allows vehicles to be parked parallel to the street. The wall parallel to the street
must include openings.
iii. Where the garage is setback in accordance with Clause 5.1.2 C2.1 iii b. The garage is to be finished to the
same standard as the rest of the dwelling.
3.4 R-CODES PART B CLAUSE 5.2.2 Garage Width is amended to include:
C2.1 A garage door and its supporting structures (or a garage wall where a garage is aligned parallel to the street)
facing the primary street is not to occupy more than 50 per cent of the frontage at the setback line as viewed
from the street (refer Part B Figure 8c). This may be increased up to 60 per cent where an upper floor or balcony
extends for more than half the width of the garage and its supporting structures (or a garage wall where a garage
is aligned parallel to the street) and the entrance to the dwelling is clearly visible from the primary street.
C2.2 For lots with 12m frontage or less, where a tree worthy of retention is retained in accordance with Clause 5.1.2
C2.1 iii b, a garage door and its supporting structures (or a garage wall where a garage is aligned parallel to the
street) facing the primary street is not to occupy more than 60 per cent of the frontage at the setback line as
viewed from the street (refer figure 3).
3.5 R-CODES PART B CLAUSE 5.2.4 Street Walls and Fences is amended to include:
C4.2 Solid pillars that form part of front fences not more than 1.8m above natural ground level provided the horizontal
dimension of the pillars is not greater than 450mm by 450mm and pillars are separated by visually permeable
fencing.
C4.3 Front Fences are not to be constructed in concrete, pre-cast, fibre cement or solid metal sheeting (e.g.
Colorbond).
C4.4 For sites on street corners, street fences or walls within the secondary street setback area are to be designed in
accordance with C4.1 and C4.2 for a minimum 50 per cent of the street boundary behind the primary street
setback (refer Part C Figure 3.6d).
C4.4 For side fencing that extends to the Primary Street Setback area, the following is allowable:
i. To be in accordance with C4.1, C4.2 and C4.3 comprising of a masonry construction (or composite that give
an appearance of a similar quality to masonry); or
ii. The height of the metal sheeting fence (e.g. Colorbond) is to a maximum height of 1.2m within the front
setback line.
C4.5 Uniform fencing is to comply with the following standards:
Along Major Transport Corridors (Railway Reservation, and a Primary or Other Regional Road Reservations)
Only:
i. Fencing maximum height shall be 2100mm above natural ground level;
ii. Fencing may be solid in construction for the length of the fencing with the exception of any applicable
primary street setback area, whereby the fencing shall be constructed as per the All other locations
requirement outlined below; and
iii. Fencing shall be protected by anti-graffiti coating.
All other locations:
i. Fencing maximum height shall be 1800mm above natural ground level, with solid sections not exceeding a
maximum height of 1.2m, and visually permeable infill panels above up to 1.8m height between piers;
ii. Pillars in which the horizontal dimension of the pillars is not greater than 450mm by 450mm; and
iii. The solid section of fencing shall be maximum length of 50% of the length of the boundary behind the
primary street setback line; and
iv. Fencing shall be protected by anti-graffiti coating.
City of Canning Policy LP.01 Residential Development Page 3 of 9
=== PAGE 4 ===
C4.6 Where ‘uniform’ fencing abutting public open space is required as a condition of subdivision or development
approval, the fencing is to comply with C4.5 All other locations above, as applicable.
3.6 R-CODES PART B CLAUSE 5.2.5 Sightlines is amended to include:
C5.1 Walls, fences and other structures truncated or reduced to no higher than 0.75m within 1.5m of where walls,
fences, or other structures adjoin:
i. a driveway that intersects a street, right-of-way or communal street;
ii. a right-of-way or communal street that intersects a public street; and
iii. two streets that intersect.
C5.2 Fencing no higher than 1.8m high above natural ground level within 1.5m of where a driveway meets a street
with:
i. no more than one solid pillar provided the horizontal dimension of the pillar is not greater than 450mm
by 450mm;
ii. no more than two panels (inclusive of a sliding or swinging gate) with visually permeable fencing in
accordance with Clause 5.2.4 Street Walls and Fences - C4.1;
iii. Do not impact upon the root system of an existing Street Tree or Tree Worthy of Retention in
accordance with LP.09 – Tree Retention, Planting and Development; and
iv. where there are no existing or planned footpaths adjacent to the property boundary (refer Figures 4 &
5).
3.7 R-CODES PART B CLAUSE 5.4.3 Outbuildings C3 Table B. Large and Multiple Outbuildings is replaced with:
B. Large and i. not located within a primary or secondary street setback area,
multiple ii. does not reduce the open space and outdoor living area requirements in Table B.
outbuildings iii. For Lots up to 600m2 in site area;
a. individually or collectively does not exceed 60m2 in area or 10 percent in
aggregate of the site area, whichever is the lesser;
b. does not exceed a wall height of 3m;
c. does not exceed a ridge height of 4.2m;
iv. For Lots 601m2 – 800m2 in site area;
a. individually or collectively does not exceed 80m2 in area or 10 percent in
aggregate of the site area, whichever is the lesser;
b. does not exceed a wall height of 3m;
c. does not exceed a ridge height of 4.2m;
v. For Lots 801m2 – 1000m2 in site area;
d. individually or collectively does not exceed 90m2 in area or 10 percent in
aggregate of the site area, whichever is the lesser;
e. does not exceed a wall height of 3m;
f. does not exceed a ridge height of 4.8m;
vi. For Lots 1001m2 – 2000m2;
g. individually or collectively does not exceed 100m2 in area or 10 percent in
aggregate of the site area, whichever is the lesser;
h. does not exceed a wall height of 3m;
i. does not exceed a ridge height of 4.8m;
vii. For Lots over 2001m2;
j. individually or collectively does not exceed 130m2 in area or 10 percent in
aggregate of the site area, whichever is the lesser;
k. does not exceed a wall height of 3m;
l. does not exceed a ridge height of 4.8m;
C. Sea i. Only one (1) sea container is permitted per site to a maximum area of 30m2;
Containers ii. not located within a primary or secondary street setback area;
iii. does not reduce the open space and outdoor living area requirements in Table B;
iv. does not exceed a wall height of 2.4m;
v. does not exceed a ridge height of 4.2m;
City of Canning Policy LP.01 Residential Development Page 4 of 9
=== PAGE 5 ===
vi. the sea container does not exceed the collective outbuilding area for a lot as
stipulated under Part B Large and multiple outbuildings;
vii. Must be upgraded or painted in a colour that is similar to or complementary to
the colour of existing buildings on the property, or the surrounding landscape;
viii. Must be openable internal to the sea container and provided with permanent
ventilation by either openable windows or a roof vent;
ix. Must not be refrigerated or used for purposes other than storage.
3.8 R-CODES PART B CLAUSE 5.4.4 External fixtures, utilities and facilities is amended to include:
C4.8 Where multiple dwellings, or five or more grouped dwellings are proposed a Waste Management Plan required
which demonstrates on-site collection.
C4.9 A power outlet (minimum 15 amp) shall be provided to each car parking space within a garage.
City of Canning Policy LP.01 Residential Development Page 5 of 9
=== PAGE 6 ===
Figure 1: Street setbacks when retaining a tree worthy of retention.
Figure 2: Lot boundary setbacks when retaining a tree worthy of retention.
City of Canning Policy LP.01 Residential Development Page 6 of 9
=== PAGE 7 ===
Figure 3: Setbacks for lots with 12m frontage or less when retaining a tree worthy of retention.
City of Canning Policy LP.01 Residential Development Page 7 of 9
=== PAGE 8 ===
Figure 4: Fencing height within the front setback area provided in accordance with clause 5.2.4 & 5.2.5
Figure 5: Fencing provided in accordance with clause 5.2.5 C5.1 & C5.2.
4 Provisions – Other Exemptions
Development approval is not required for the following works, as informed by Schedule 2, Part 7, Clause 61 (1), table
item 20., of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015:
4.1 Sea Containers on a Temporary Basis
a) Sea containers can be placed within a residential property and incidental to a dwelling for a temporary period of up
to one (1) month, subject to the following conditions:
i. There is no more than one (1) sea container on the lot and placed wholly within the lot boundaries;
ii. The sea container is used for the purposes of storing household items for relocation in the case where a
landowner is moving from one property to another; and
iii. The occurrence only happens once per calendar year to the lot.
City of Canning Policy LP.01 Residential Development Page 8 of 9
=== PAGE 9 ===
Governance References
• Planning and Development Act 2005
Statutory Compliance • Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
• Local Planning Scheme No. 42
• Residential Design Codes
Adjoining Owners Comment Proforma Variation to the Residential Design Codes (City of Canning
Process Links
website or HPRM D13/159544)
Policy Administration
Program Officer title Date last approved
Planning and Development Director Planning Development 10 December 2024
Version Decision Reference Synopsis Delegation No.
N/A
1 SD-014-19 Final adoption
N/A
2 CD-032-21 Advertising of draft policy
N/A
3 CD-001-22 Final adoption
N/A
4 PD-010-24 Council adoption
City of Canning Policy LP.01 Residential Development Page 9 of 9