Planning Process and Decision Making
This document outlines the planning procedures for advertising of development applications,
subdivision referrals and local planning policies and the process for decision making of development
applications. This policy is procedural in nature and does not contain development standards.
If you are searching for general information in relation to planning requirements, please refer to the
Planning Services page of our website https://www.melvillecity.com.au/ or alternatively you can
speak to one of our planning officers either on the phone, 9364 0666 or in person at 10 Almondbury
Road, Booragoon during business hours, 8.30am – 5:00pm Monday to Friday.
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP 1.1
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 20 May 2025
CITATION
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (Regulations) and the City of Melville Local Planning
Scheme No. 6 (LPS No.6). This Local Planning Policy may be cited as Local Planning Policy No.
1.1 – Planning Processes and Decision Making (LPP 1.1)
POLICY OBJECTIVES
The objectives of this policy are as follows:
• To promote a consistent approach by the City in the assessment and public advertising of
development applications, local planning policies, subdivision referrals and other planning
matters;
• To facilitate community input into the decision making process; and
• To provide information to Elected Members, the City administration, applicants and submitters
regarding the process for dealing with planning matters.
POLICY SCOPE
This policy sets out the assessment and advertising processes relating to the assessment of
applications for development approval and related matters.
The requirements for advertising of planning matters generally are set out in the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (Regulations). Where there is conflict
between this policy and the Regulations, the Regulations prevail.
Clause 2.3 of the Residential Design Codes Volume 1 outlines the requirements for consultation for
low and medium density residential development. This Local Planning Policy provides clarification
on the consultation requirements development assessed under the Residential Design Codes
Volume 1. It also provides information regarding the extent of, and methods of, consultation which
will be undertaken by the City when it is required. This Local Planning Policy also covers
development assessed under the Residential Design Codes Volume 2.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 1 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

POLICY APPLICATION
This policy applies to all development on land where Local Planning Scheme No. 6 applies.
DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS USED IN POLICY
Definitions
Decision Maker
That body, organisation or authorised person legally vested with the power to make decisions,
pursuant to relevant legislation and applicable planning policy frameworks.
Relevant and Non-Relevant Planning Matters
Relevant Planning Matters Non-Relevant Planning Matters
a) Matters to be considered by the City a) Perceived loss of property value
under Clause 67 of Schedule 2 of the b) Private disputes between neighbours
Planning and Development (Local including access & egress and
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 easements
(the Regulations); and/or c) Dividing fence issues
b) The requirements of Local Planning d) Matters that are usually dealt with by the
Scheme No.6 or applicable Planning building permit or a subsequent approval
Instrument (Activity Centre Plan, process
Structure Plan, Local Development e) Impact of construction work
Plan, Planning Code or Planning Policy) f) Trade competition concerns (in most
which requires the decision maker to circumstances)
exercise judgement; and/or g) Personal morals or views about the
c) Any development standard requiring the applicant
decision maker to exercise judgement h) Matters that are controlled under other
against the Design Principles of the R- legislation
Codes.
Complex Development Applications
For the purposes of this policy Complex Development Applications are outlined in the Regulations
definitions as:
a) an application for approval of development that is a use of land if the use is not specifically
referred to in the zoning table for this Scheme in respect of the zone in which the development
is located; or
b) an application of a kind identified elsewhere in the Scheme, or in a local planning policy, as a
complex application for development approval;
In reference to clause (b) above, the City has the below development types included in complex
development applications:
(i) 10 or more grouped or multiple dwellings;
(ii) 2,000 m2 or more of commercial floor space; and/or
(iii) A Development Application which is to be determined under Part 11B of the Planning and
Development Amendment Act 2023 (this is development which meets the value and
significance threshold outlined in this legislation).
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 2 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

An amendment to a previous planning approval, is not classed as a complex development
application, unless the amendment increases the number of dwellings or commercial floor space in
the planning approval of a development such that the amended development would meet the
definition of a complex development application.
Standard Development
For the purposes of this policy a Standard Development includes all of the following;
• Residential development which requires a performance assessment against the Design
Principles of Residential Design Codes Volume 1 or the Element Objectives of the Residential
Design Codes Volume 2 and has a possible impact on the amenity of adjoining owners and
occupiers.
• A development which is required to be advertised in accordance with the Zoning Table (Table
17) of LPS6.
• Non-residential development which does not meet the definition of complex development
application.
Mixed Use Development
A development is classed as Mixed Use when it incorporates an element of residential development
in the form of multiple dwellings, and an element of non-residential development such as an office.
Submitters
Parties who lodge a written comment on a planning application, whether in support or objection.
Abbreviations
CEO Chief Executive Officer – City of Melville
LPS6 City of Melville Local Planning Scheme No. 6
DAP Development Assessment Panel
DAU Development Advisory Unit
DPLH Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage
EMB Elected Members Bulletin
GNC Geographic Names Committee of Landgate
MRS Metropolitan Region Scheme (as amended)
PAW Pedestrian Access Way
RAR Responsible Authority Report
R-Codes Residential Design Codes Volume 1
and Residential Design Codes Volume 2 - Apartments (as amended)
Regulations Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
(as amended)*
DAP Regulations Planning and Development (Development Assessment Panels)
Regulations 2011 (as amended)
SAT State Administrative Tribunal
WAPC Western Australian Planning Commission
* Note: unless otherwise stated Clauses referred to are contained in Schedule 2 of the Regulations
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 3 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

POLICY STATEMENT
1.0 Applications for Development Approval
1.1 The Planning and Development Act 2005 defines “development” as:
“development’ means the development or use of any land, including –
(a) any demolition, erection, construction, alteration of or addition to any building or
structure on the land;
(b) the carrying out on the land any excavation or other works;
(c) in the case of a place to which a Conservation Order made under section 59 of the
Heritage of Western Australia Act 1990 applies, any act or thing that –
i. is likely to change the character of that place or external appearance of any
building; or
ii. would constitute an irreversible alteration of the fabric of any building.”
1.2 Clause 60 of the Regulations states that all development requires approval prior to the
commencement of works unless it is of a type referred to in Clause 61.
1.3 Clauses 62 and 63 of the Regulations outline the information required to be provided as a
part of the application for development approval. The City has also prepared a checklist to
assist applicants in this respect. All applications for development approval are to include (at
a minimum) all of the relevant information as outlined by the development application
checklist. Where all of this information is not provided at lodgement, the application may be
returned to the applicant.
1.4 Once a preliminary assessment of the application has been undertaken, further information
may be requested from the applicant to enable a complete or more detailed assessment to
be undertaken.
1.5 Clause 75 of the Regulations states that the local government is to determine applications for
development approval within 60 days of the receipt of the application or 90 days where the
application requires consultation with the public or other authorities. This timeframe may be
extended if agreed in writing by the applicant and local government. If a decision is not made
before the expiry date, the local government can be taken to have refused the development
application, and an application for review to the State Administrative Tribunal may be
triggered.
1.6 For development applications which are to be determined by the DAP, the timeframe for
preparing and submitting an RAR is determined by the DAP Regulations.
2.0 Assessment
2.1 Development applications are assessed having regard to the development controls
established by the planning framework including LPS6, state planning policies, the R-Codes,
adopted precinct structure plans and activity centre plans, local development plans, Council
Policy and local planning policy provisions.
2.2 Where a development application requires an assessment against the relevant performance
standards, the following (as applicable) will be taken into consideration:
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 4 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

(a) For all applications:
• The matters to be considered in Clause 67 of the Regulations.
• Relevant planning documentation such as the Local Planning Strategy, Structure
Plans, State Planning Policies and the like.
• Any other planning document adopted pursuant to LPS6.
• Any comments received from the City’s (or State’s) Design Review Panel.
(b) For applications where an exercise of judgement is sought in relation to the development
requirements in LPS6:
• Whether Clause 34 of LPS6 provides the ability to consider the application.
• Whether the proposal satisfies the objectives of each zone.
(c) For applications where an exercise of judgement is sought in relation to the development
requirements in a Local Planning Policy or Council Policy:
• The objective of the policy.
• Any additional assessment criteria within the policy.
(d) For applications which require an exercise of judgement under the R-Codes:
• The objective(s) of the provision.
• The relevant Design Principle(s) or Element Objective(s).
Note: For clarification in respect of this, refer to the Explanatory Guidelines and other supporting documentation of
the R-Codes
(e) For applications which require an exercise of judgement under an adopted structure plan,
activity centre plan or local development plan:
• The objectives and vision of the plan; and
• The desired outcome for the relevant element in the Canning Bridge Activity
Centre Plan (where assessment is required under this Activity Centre Plan).
2.3 Where Local Planning Policy – 1.2: Design Review Panel is applicable the development
application should be referred to the City’s Design Review Panel for its assessment and
comment.
2.4 Development applications may also be referred to other government departments for their
assessment, comment and recommendation where required.
• The City is bound to referral comments received by State Government agencies
where required under the MRS and the relevant delegations and received within the
required timeframe.
• The City is not bound by comments received by State Government agencies where
the referral is not required under the MRS and relevant delegations.
• The City may elect to not determine applications under the MRS and instead refer
the MRS component of the application to the Department of Planning, Lands and
Heritage for determination. This would be in circumstances where the City does not
agree with the comments received by the State Government Agency and be able to
determine the LPS6 portion of the application.
2.5 Where, after the granting of development approval, an amendment is sought to either the
timeframe to substantially commence, to a condition of development approval or the works
component, the City will assess the amendment as per the Regulations and clause 3.13
and may waive the requirements of clause 2.1 to 2.4 depending on the nature of the
amendment.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 5 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

3.0 Advertising of Development Applications
The public consultation, or advertising process (as it is also referred to), is intended to facilitate
community input into the decision-making process. Consultation can take a number of forms
including letters to adjoining landowners and occupiers, a sign on site and information on the City’s
website. The written input received during the consultation process inform the decision-making
process however neighbour consultation comments are not binding – they do not replace the role of
the decision-maker. The decision maker is required to consider the comments received and balance
these with a technical assessment against the relevant planning frameworks when making a
judgement on the merit of a proposal. The following clauses outline the process the City will follow
in relation to the advertising of Development Applications.
3.1 The following table outlines the minimum public consultation requirements for Development
Applications
Application Time Period Sign on site Written City of
Type (Calendar notification Melville
Days) to owners Website
and
occupiers
Residential 14 No Yes Yes
Development* As per clause
3.6
Standard Non- 14 As per Clause Yes Yes
Residential 64 of As per clause
Development Regulations 3.6
Complex 28 Yes Within 200 Yes
Development metres of
subject site
*where the proposal does not meet the definition of a complex development and meets the criteria under clause
3.3
All advertising is required to adhere to the requirements of Clause 64 of the Regulations
where applicable.
3.2 Informal consultation and communication between the applicants and adjoining property
owners is strongly encouraged prior to lodgement with the City. This more courteous,
neighbourly approach will, in many situations enable an outcome to be achieved which best
meets the interests of all parties involved.
The City will either reduce or refund 25% of the standard development application fee where:
a) The proponent has pro-actively consulted on their plans with the adjoining properties
clause 3.1 and 3.6 of this policy prior to development application lodgement; and
b) The City has been provided with the necessary evidence at the time of lodgement
that pre-lodgement public consultation has occurred. The City can provide the
proponent with a list of adjoining property owner and occupier postal addresses
consistent with clause 3.1 and 3.6 of this policy. The evidence of pre-lodgement
consultation must be completed by the owner/occupier for the relevant property at the
time of lodgement. This will be verified by the City;
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 6 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

c) The City reserves the right to veto any pre-lodgement public consultation and will
undertake separate consultation to any owners/occupies in the surrounding area; and
d) If no response from an adjoining owner/occupier is received within 14 days from the
proponent requesting comment, the proponent can submit that an attempt at contact
was made at lodgement. This may be accepted in lieu of evidence of pre-lodgement
consultation for that specific property only, enabling the proponent to still qualify for
the pre-consultation concession (depending on the quality of evidence that
consultation was attempted).
3.3 Advertising of Residential Development.
(a) Any application which seeks a performance assessment against the following the Design
Principles of the R-Codes (Volume 1) and Element Objectives of the R-Codes (Volume
2):
Part B: Low Density
• Clause 5.1.3 Lot boundary setback;
• Clause 5.1.6 Building height;
• Clause 5.3.7 Site works;
• Clause 5.4.1 Visual privacy; and
Clause 5.4.2 Solar access for adjoining sites
Part C: Medium Density
• Clause 3.2 Building height;
• Clause 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks;
• Clause 3.5 Site works and retaining walls;
• Clause 3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites; and
• Clause 3.10 Visual Privacy.
Volume 2: Multiple Dwellings R80 and above (including Mixed Use Development)
• All applications excluding subsequent additions which are considered minor in
nature.
The applications which meet the above criteria will be advertised to the adjoining owner(s)
and occupier(s) as detailed in Clause 3.6 as there may be a possible impact on the amenity
of adjoining properties.
(b) Notwithstanding the advertising requirements for Part B and C of the R-Codes Vol.1 as
outlined above, if the City Officers are of the opinion that the discretion sought under
the above clauses is minor in nature, the requirement for advertising may be waived if:
(i) the development clearly meets the performance requirements of the R-Codes;
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 7 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

(ii) the discretion sought has the less amenity impact as the deemed to comply
requirement; and
(iii) the proposal will result in a better outcome overall than a deemed to comply
requirement scenario.
Note: This exemption does not apply to performance assessments required under Clause 5.1.6
Building height and Clause 5.4.2 Solar access for adjoining sites of Part B or Clause 3.2 Building
height and Clause 3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites of Part C. Performance assessments under
these clauses always need to be advertised.
(c) Applications which seek a performance assessment in relation to Design Principles or
Element Objectives, other than those listed above, may be advertised at the discretion
of City officers if it is considered there may be a possible impact on the amenity of
adjoining owners and occupiers.
3.4 Advertising of Standard Non-Residential Development
(a) The advertising of a ‘D’ or ‘I’ land use is generally only required to be undertaken where
the scale or nature of the use may have impact on the amenity of the locality.
(b) Advertising of land uses which have an X permissibility within the respective zone is not
required – these land uses are not able to be considered and will be refused.
(c) Non-residential development which seeks the exercise of judgement having regard to the
LPS6 provisions, Council Policy, a Local Planning Policy, adopted precinct structure
plans, activity centre plans or local development plans may be advertised at the discretion
of City officers if it is considered there may be a possible impact on the amenity of
adjoining owners and occupiers.
3.5 Advertising of Complex Development Applications and under Clause 12 of the Regulations
This is to be undertaken as per Clause 64 of the Regulations.
3.6 Extent of advertising
(a) Where advertising is to be undertaken, an assessment as to the potentially affected
properties is required. This assessment is to take into account:
• The size and configuration of the application site in relation to adjoining properties;
and
• The property(s) which are likely to be impacted as a result of the proposed
development.
(b) Limited public consultation – where a proposed development application is required to
be advertised under the requirements of the Regulations or this policy, the extent of the
advertising undertaken should be tailored to the perceived likely impacts.
(c) Wider public consultation – where a proposal meets the definition of complex
development, requires general advertisement in accordance with LPS6 is required by
Clause 3.1 to 3.5 above or Clause 64 of the Regulations, the City will send letters to
adjoining and nearby properties. In addition, a site notice will be installed for the duration
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 8 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

of the consultation period and notification will be placed on the City’s website. The notice
will follow the requirements of Clause 64 of the Regulations.
(d) Where wider engagement is considered to be necessary, the details of the proposal may
be provided on the City’s social media platforms. In addition, more property owners and
occupiers may be consulted directly, and a press notice may be initiated.
3.7 Advertising to owners and occupiers
Where advertising is undertaken, both the property owners and occupiers are consulted.
3.8 Timeframes
(a) Where advertising of a development application is required, it will be undertaken in
accordance with the minimum timeframes within Clause 3.1. This will be extended to
account for public holidays and the requirements of Clause 64 of the Regulations.
Additional time may be provided at the discretion of the City to account for any mailing
delays.
(b) Persons can make formal request for additional time to make a submission, however, to
enable the decision maker to achieve the statutory timeframes associated with the
assessment of planning applications, formal requests for an extension to the advertising
period may not always be facilitated. Submissions received after the closing date will be
taken into account where possible, however will be noted as late submissions in any
reporting.
3.9 Advertising Process
(a) Written correspondence will be provided via traditional post or via email.
(b) Where the display of a sign on the property is required and/or a notice displayed in a
local newspaper, these are to be undertaken by the applicant in accordance with Clause
86(3) and 87 of the Regulations. This advertising is undertaken at the applicant’s cost as
per Clause 64A of the Regulations.
(c) Where a sign on site is required, the signage is to be displayed along each of the road
frontages to the subject property. The sign size shall meet the requirements of Clause
86(3) of the Regulations (unless varied as per Clause 88 of the Regulations).
(d) The content of advertising documentation should include:
(i) The description of the proposed development including its application reference
number, property street address and any name associated with the property; and
(ii) Details of why the application is being advertised, and
(iii) How and where the details of the application can be viewed; and
(iv) Details of how and to whom submissions should be made; and
(v) The deadline for submissions.
3.10 Amended Plans
(a) During the course of the assessment of a planning application, the applicant may submit
amended plans.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 9 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

(b) Where an application has previously been advertised and amended plans are received
post-advertising, the amended plans are to be the subject of a further consultation period
where in the opinion of the decision maker:
(i) The amended plans represent a significantly different proposal to that which was
previously advertised; or
(ii) The proposed amendment(s) will potentially have a greater amenity impact; or
(iii) Where the development results in any additional exercise of judgement which may
in the opinion of the City have an adverse impact upon the amenity of adjoining
property owners and occupiers.
(c) Where amended plans reduce the impact of a proposed development and/or where
amended plans are lodged in order to address relevant planning related concerns as
expressed by submitters, the amended plans need not be the subject of re-advertising.
(d) Where amended plans are required to be the subject of re-advertising, the consultation
process followed should be in accordance with Part 3 of this Policy.
3.11 Amendment Development Applications
(a) Where approval is sought to amend a development approval, and where the original
development application was the subject of advertising, further consultation will be
required in accordance with Part 3.0 of this Policy, unless the proposed amendments:
(i) are minor in nature; and
(ii) will not result in any additional impact upon any adjoining properties or the
surrounding area.
4.0 Submissions and Petitions
4.1 Submissions
(a) To be submitted in writing via letter, email, or via the City’s website.
(b) Submissions should address ‘relevant planning matters’ (as defined in this policy) only.
4.2 Petitions
(a) Where a petition is received in relation to a planning application currently being
considered by the City, the petition will be reported to the next available Council meeting.
Where appropriate, petitions may then be reported to the DAU meeting, a further Council
meeting and/or the DAP where the development proposal is being considered.
(b) If a petition is received on a matter which the City’s Officers have delegation, then this
petition will still be reported to Council, however the petition cannot delay the decision
being made by City Officers.
(b) The lead petitioner will receive advice in respect to any reporting to the Council, DAU
and/or DAP and be informed of the final decision.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 10 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

4.3 Consideration of Submissions & Petitions
(a) The content of all submissions received will be considered prior to the determination of
the development application.
(b) Only relevant planning related matters (as outlined in the definitions section of this policy)
in submissions can be taken into account. The decision maker has a duty to properly
balance its consideration of all relevant factors in an objective and impartial manner in
making recommendation or determination of a planning application.
(c) Details of all submissions are confidential, and will not be released to an applicant or
third party, unless required to by law. However, a written summary of the key issues
raised within the submissions will be provided to the applicant upon request. The
summary will not include the personal details of the submitter(s).
(d) For applications which are to be determined by the DAU, Council or DAP, the Officer
report will include a summary of the issues raised in all of the submissions. This summary
will not include identification or personal details of the submitter(s), however full copies
of the submissions may be provided to Elected Members upon request.
(e) All persons who lodge submissions will receive advice of the final determination of the
application. In addition, where the application is referred to a DAU meeting, Council
meeting or DAP meeting for endorsement or determination; submitters will receive
further notification by the City of those specific meeting dates and details.
5.0 Metropolitan Region Scheme (MRS) Applications
5.1 Applications for development on MRS zoned or reserved land are submitted to the City with
all of the information required by the Planning Application checklist in addition to a completed
MRS Form 1 application form.
Note: Development which is wholly within the Development Control Area of the Swan Canning Riverpark are to be
lodged with the Department of Biodiversity, Conservation and Attractions (DBCA) on the relevant form. The City
are a referral agency for these types of applications.
5.2 There are no applicable planning fees for these applications.
5.3 The City’s role is to make a recommendation to the DPLH within 42 calendar days taking into
account all those matters outlined in Part 2.2 above (where applicable) and the intent of the
MRS reservation.
6.0 Local Planning Policy
6.1 Proposals to amend revoke or introduce new Local Planning Policies are to be advertised in
accordance with Clause 4 of the Regulations.
6.2 Where amendments are made following the advertising period, which significantly alter the
intent of any of the policy provisions, the revised Policy will be re-advertised in accordance
with Clause 4 of the Regulations.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 11 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

7.0 Scheme Amendments
7.1 Proposals to amend the wording of LPS6 and/or to change the zoning of any property can be
initiated by an interested party or by the City as per the Regulations.
7.2 All proposals to amend LPS6 are presented to Council to determine whether the proposal has
merit or not. If the proposal has merit, the Council will resolve to initiate the proposal to allow
public consultation and referral to relevant agencies to occur. If the endorsement of the Council
is not given, the process will terminate. If able to be supported, the City officers may make
recommendations to augment the Scheme Amendment either as part of the initiation
recommendation or prior to presentation to Council.
7.3 Part 5 of the Regulations provides detailed guidance with respect to the process to be
undertaken in relation to scheme amendments. This Part outlines the process for basic,
standard and complex scheme amendments. Once a scheme amendment is initiated, the City
is required to follow the process outlines in Part 5 of the Regulations including advertising
procedures.
8.0 Pedestrian Access Way (PAW) closures
8.1 A proposal to close an existing PAW can be submitted by an external party or can be initiated
by the City.
8.2 Applications for the closure of PAW’s are assessed in accordance with the Department of
Planning’s Procedure for the Closure of Pedestrian Access Ways – Planning Guidelines
(October 2009).
8.3 All proposals are presented to Council to determine whether they have merit or not. If the
proposal has merit, the Council will resolve to initiate the proposal to allow public consultation
and referral to relevant agencies to occur. If the endorsement of the Council is not given, the
proposal will not proceed further.
8.4 Where Council resolves to endorse a PAW closure proposal for advertising, the application will
be the subject of community consultation for a minimum of 30 calendar days as follows:
(a) Letters sent to the owners and occupiers of all properties within a 100 metre radius of
the subject PAW.
(b) The applicant is required to display signage at each of the entrances to the PAW to
Council specifications.
(c) The applicant is to place an advert in a local newspaper circulating within the District to
Council specifications.
(d) Details of the proposed closure will be posted to the City’s website and social media
platforms.
8.5 Following advertising and referral to any relevant service agencies or government authorities,
the proposal is re-presented to Council with a recommendation to endorse or not endorse the
closure. The Officer report will include a summary of all submissions received.
8.6 Following consideration by Council, the proposed amendment is forwarded to the DPLH to
approve or refuse the proposal.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 12 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

9.0 Restrictive Covenants
9.1 Applications to modify or remove restrictive covenants are generally not advertised as they are
only supported where the modification or removal is consistent with the requirements of LPS6,
the R-Codes and Local Planning Policy.
10.0 Determination of All Matters
10.1 All applications for Planning Approval and related matters are determined in accordance with
the City’s delegation requirements, LPS6, the R-Codes and Local Planning Policy.
10.2 The consideration and determination of all applications is to be in accordance with Council
Policy – 052: Quasi-Judicial Role.
11.0 Refusal of applications without advertising
Any planning proposal where the initial assessment determines that the proposal does not satisfy
the requirements of LPS6, the R-Codes or Local Planning Policy may be refused under delegated
authority without first being advertised unless required to be advertised under the Regulations.
12.0 Internal Development Advisory Unit (DAU)
Please refer to the DAU Terms of Reference.
13.0 Council determination
13.1 All meetings of Council are open to the public unless otherwise notified.
13.2 Public statements, questions and deputations in relation to planning applications may be made
at meetings of Council in accordance with the City of Melville Meeting Procedures Local Law
2017 at the discretion of the CEO. Requests to make a public statement, ask a question or
make a deputation should be made in writing to the City’s Governance Team by 9.00am of the
Monday prior to the meeting.
13.3 For applications which are to be determined by the Council, the City will notify both the
applicant and any submitters of the meeting details and the subsequent decision of Council.
13.4 The agendas and minutes of all meetings are available on the City’s website and at City of
Melville libraries.
14.0 Development Assessment Panel (DAP) applications
14.1 DAPs are governed by the Planning and Development Act 2005, the Planning and
Development (Development Assessment Panel) Regulations 2011 (the Regulations) and the
Local Government (Development Assessment Panels) Regulations 2025.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 13 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

14.2 The Metro Inner Development Assessment Panel (DAP) is the decision-making body
responsible for determining all City of Melville DAP applications.
14.3 For all DAP applications, the City’s Officers are required to prepare a Responsible Authority
Report (RAR) to the DAP. This report outlines the proposal, the assessment undertaken, a
summary of any submissions received and a recommendation.
14.4 The DAP determines the application in the place of the City of Melville or other decision maker,
taking into account all of the relevant provisions within LPS6, the R-Codes, Local Planning
Policies and any other relevant planning document.
14.5 Elected Members will be made aware of the details of DAP applications via the Elected
Members Bulletin (EMB). At the appropriate time, further detail will also be provided via a link
to the Melville Talks page on the City’s website.
14.6 At the completion of the public advertising period Elected Members will be provided with a
summary of the submissions received via the weekly EMB.
14.7 The applicant and any submitters will be advised in writing of the details of the DAP meeting
once details of the meeting are known and advised of the opportunity to make a deputation on
the application at DAP meeting via the DAP meeting procedures. Submitters who are unable
to attend the meeting location or attend online on their own will have option provided to attend
the meeting online at the City’s offices.
15.0 Significant Development Applications (Part 11B)
15.1 Significant Development Applications made under Part 11B of the Planning and Development
Act 2005 is a pathway available for developments which are of State or regional significance
and/or meet a $20 million cost of development threshold.
15.2 Part 11B applications are lodged with the DPLH and determined by the Statutory Planning
Committee (SPC) which is a sub-committee or the Western Australian Planning Commission.
The City is a referral agency for these applications with the City having 60 days to provide
comment. The DPLH undertake any necessary advertising upon advice from the City.
15.3 The City’s Officers are required to prepare a submission to the DPLH which may be in the
manner and form of a report. This referral response needs to outline the assessment
undertaken and a recommendation.
15.4 The SPC determines the application in the place of the City of Melville or other decision maker,
considering all of the relevant provisions within LPS6, the R-Codes, State Planning Policies,
Local Planning Policies, Council Policies and any other relevant planning document.
15.5 Elected Members will be made aware of the details of Part 11B applications via the Elected
Members Bulletin (EMB). At the appropriate time, further detail will also be provided via a link
to the Melville Talks page on the City’s website.
15.6 The referral response will be presented to Council for adoption or modification. No delegation
is provided for Part 11B applications to City Officers.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 14 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements (as amended): Planning and Development Act 2005
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Planning and Development (Development Assessment
Panel) Regulations 2011
Strata Titles Act 1995
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Planning and Development Regulations 2009
Planning and Development (Development Assessment
Panels) Regulations 2011
Local Planning Scheme No. 6
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Procedures
Subdivision Procedure
Pedestrian Access Way Closure Application Procedure
Naming of Roads and Parks Procedure
Scheme Amendment Procedure
Development Assessment Panel Work Instruction
Development Assessment Panel Process Map
Part 11B – Significant Development Pathway Application
Guide
WAPC Planning Guidelines
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: State Planning Policies and Development Control
Policies
Residential Design Codes Volume 1 and Volume 2
All Local Planning Policies and Council Policies
Local Planning Strategy
Precinct Structure Plans or Activity Centre Plans
Local Development Plans
WAPC Planning Bulletins
Delegated Authority No: DA-020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY ITEM NO.
Ordinary Meeting of Council 19 June 2007 P07/1004
REVIEWS
Special Meeting of Council 9 November 2011 P10/3178
Ordinary Meeting of Council 21 October 2014 P14/3560
Ordinary Meeting of Council 18 November 2014 P14/3560
Ordinary Meeting of Council 15 September 2015 P15/3658
Ordinary Meeting of Council 21 June 2016 P16/3711
Ordinary Meeting of Council 21 March 2017 P17/3747
Administrative Review 6 August 2019
(Council Resolution 18/6/2019)
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20 October 2020 P20/3874
Administrative Review 10 August 2023
Ordinary Meeting of Council 19 November 2024 UP24/50
Administrative Review 20 May 2025 UP25/69
(Council Resolution 20 May 2025)
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 6/06/2025 11:19 AM Page 15 of 15
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.