Department of Planning,
Lands and Heritage
Position
Statement:
Planning for Tourism and
Short-term Rental Accommodation
November 2024
The Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage Disclaimer © State of Western Australia website: wa.gov.au/dplh
acknowledges the traditional owners and This document has been produced by the email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
custodians of land and waterways across Western Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage Published by the
Australia. The Department is committed to on behalf of the Western Australian Planning Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002
reconciliation to improve outcomes for Aboriginal Commission. Any representation, statement, Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
and Torres Strait Islander peoples and to work opinion or advice expressed or implied in this 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
together to provide a culturally-safe and inclusive publication is made in good faith and on the basis Perth WA 6000 This document is available in alternative
environment that the Government, its employees and agents are Locked Bag 2506 f C o o r m m m at u s n o i n c a a t p io p n li s c a B t r i a o n n c t h o . the
not liable for any damage or loss whatsoever which Perth WA 6001
may occur as a result of action taken or not taken,
as the case may be, in respect of any representation, Publication date: 24/09/2024
statement, opinion or advice referred to herein. Operational date: 18/11/2024
Professional advice should be obtained before
applying the information contained in this
document to particular circumstances.

Position Statement:
1
Planning for Tourism and Short-term Rental Accommodation
November 2024
1. Policy intent
to protect the amenity, environmental and Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (LPS
landscape values of tourist areas, and to Regulations), aside from those broad use
The intent of this Position Statement is address potential land use conflict. In some types listed under Section 3.1 – Exclusions.
to guide the appropriate location and areas demand for tourism infrastructure,
management of tourism and short- term particularly accommodation, can also come Similarly, the term ‘short-term rental
rental accommodation land uses through the from other needs such as medical, business accommodation’ refers to hosted or
planning framework and: and educational travel. unhosted uses of this specific type which
will be reflected in new land use definitions
• facilitate acceptable development of
Planning for tourism must be capable of under the LPS Regulations.
new and evolving tourism opportunities;
adapting to changes in the sector and the
• provide a high-level of amenity in consideration of value-add opportunities.
3.1 Exclusions
tourism areas; and
Local governments are encouraged to
This Position Statement is not intended to
• deliver quality land use planning consult with Tourism Western Australia and
capture the following forms of short-term
outcomes. other relevant State Government agencies,
and temporary accommodation, which are
tourism associations, local operators and the
often subject to either alternative guidance
local community when undertaking planning
2. Planning for and legislation or approaches by local
for tourism as described within this Position
government (further information is available
tourism in Western Statement.
in section 4 of the Guidelines):
Australia
• lodgers and boarders;
3. Application of this
Western Australia’s many natural and • house swapping and housesitting;
Position Statement
man-made features and attractions provide
substantial opportunities for tourism, which • personal use of a holiday home or the
is a significant contributor to the State and This Position Statement applies to all tourism sharing of a holiday home with the
local economies, particularly in regional and short-term rental accommodation owner’s family and friends;
areas. Tourism encompasses an array of proposals within all regions of Western
• student exchange accommodation;
development types, sizes and locations, Australia and should be applied in
and includes accommodation, attractions, conjunction with the Planning for Tourism and • workforce accommodation; and
facilities, infrastructure and other ancillary Short-term Rental Accommodation Guidelines
• residential parks, park home parks,
services. (the Guidelines).
lifestyle villages.
Appropriate planning and management In this Position Statement the term ‘tourist
of tourist areas and uses is necessary for accommodation’ refers to all traditional forms
their promotion and retention, to prevent of tourist accommodation land uses provided
encroachment from incompatible land uses, within the Planning and Development (Local

Position Statement:
2
Planning for Tourism and Short-term Rental Accommodation
November 2024
4. Policy objectives
• Promote the co-location of • Ensure areas used exclusively for strategic
5.1 General measures
complementary and compatible tourism tourism sites and precincts are zoned as
The policy objectives for planning for tourism land uses to create identifiable tourism In general, strategic and statutory planning Tourism or Special Use.
and short-term rental accommodation are to: precincts that benefit tourism amenity. decisions should:
• Ensure that new and proposed caravan
• Provide a strategic approach to • Ensure land use impacts between • Encourage a range of tourist park sites are zoned to facilitate
the sustainable development and tourism and short- term rental accommodation, including short- term long-term security for continued
management of tourism and short-term accommodation activities and other rental accommodation, choices and use, preferably through a Tourism or
rental accommodation land uses by land uses (including residential areas) are experiences as required. Special Use/ Special Use – Caravan Park
ensuring decision- making is guided by a appropriately managed. zone, while providing for a range of
• Encourage sustainable ecotourism that
local planning strategy which reflects the appropriate incidental uses and tourism
• Manage the effects of tourism and short- recognises and complements Western
demand for local and regional tourism. accommodation types.
term rental accommodation on local Australia’s unique and sensitive natural
• Identify opportunities and protect housing markets, including: environment, heritage and Aboriginal • Maintain and support existing tourism
locations, tourism precincts and culture. and special use sites. Rezoning should
– Demand for accommodation for
sites (existing and potential) where only be supported if it is demonstrated
tourism industry workers; • Give effect to this Position Statement and
demand for future tourism land use that a tourism site is unfeasible in the
Guidelines, and the State Government
and development have been identified. – Impacts on housing supply; and long-term because of a lack of tourism
Strategy for Tourism in Western Australia
The character, landscape, visual demand, sustainable tourism function
– The availability of dwellings for long- 2020 (as amended).
amenity, economic, social, cultural and and a long-term decline of all tourism
term rental.
environmental values of natural and/ • Be consistent in the use of tourism land activities and accommodation types in
or built features that may have future use and accommodation definitions the region.
tourism potential should be protected;
5. Policy measures contained in the LPS Regulations and
any negative impacts minimised; and, The inclusion of any land uses other than
State Planning Policy 7.3: Residential
where possible, values enhanced. tourism land uses on tourism zoned land
Design Codes.
Local governments are best placed to
should be considered on a case-by-case basis.
• Plan appropriate infrastructure and plan for tourism and short-term rental • Promote the location of tourist Consideration should include whether there
services necessary to support tourism accommodation within their communities, accommodation in areas with the is appropriate infrastructure and a planning
development and ensure new and with local knowledge of tourism activity, highest tourism amenity (for example framework that supports uses other than
expanded tourism development has opportunities, constraints, including potential beach access, views, facilities, availability tourism on tourism zoned sites. The inclusion
secure access to services/infrastructure. impacts and what requirements should of services) and adequate separation of permanent residential uses requires close
• Recognise that the commercial be placed on tourism or short-term rental from, or management of, any interface consideration to ensure tourism remains the
sustainability of tourism may require accommodation proposals. with residential land uses. primary use of a site and a quality tourism
flexibility in product mix, site design and outcome is achieved in conjunction with any
risk mitigation approaches. residential component.

Position Statement:
3
Planning for Tourism and Short-term Rental Accommodation
November 2024
Where permitted, tourism uses on agricultural opportunity to ensure strategic tourism needs located appropriately to townsites • ensure any new caravan parks are
or rural land should be secondary to are planned for. The extent to which tourism and in proximity to the features and located appropriately for their context
agricultural and/or rural uses to protect the and short-term rental accommodation is attractions they are intended to serve. and intended market and function.
primacy of the land for rural uses (for example examined within the local planning strategy Locations identified for tourism should
farm stay, restaurant at vineyard, farm gate should be proportionate to the significance be consistent with other existing policies. 5.2.2 Short-term rental
sales) as provided by State Planning Policy 2.5: of tourism to the community and local accommodation
• Outline suitable planning controls to
Rural Planning. Proposals in areas subject to economy. The tourism component of the
guide and manage tourism and short-
natural hazards (bushfire, coastal, cyclone local planning strategy should: Short-term rental accommodation is the
term rental accommodation uses that
and flood prone areas) are to meet the collective name given to holiday homes, units
• Reflect on the existing planning will need to be incorporated in the local
requirements set out in the relevant State or apartments offered for short-term letting,
framework (including the local planning planning scheme.
planning policies (2.6: State Coastal Planning, often through an online booking platform
scheme and relevant local planning
draft 2.9: Planning for Water, 3.4: Natural • Be consistent with this Position or management agent. Short-term rental
policies) and whether it is fit-for-purpose
Hazards and Disasters or 3.7: Bushfire). Statement. accommodation is either hosted (where
and achieving the tourism and short-
a permanent resident (host) is present) or
term rental accommodation outcomes
Where coordination is required (for
5.2.1 Caravan parks unhosted (where guests have exclusive
being sought.
example across multiple sites, stages or for
use of an entire house, unit or apartment).
infrastructure provision), proposals within • Discuss current and emerging tourism Caravan parks are a fundamental component Commonly, they can be:
tourism precincts or sites should be informed trends and issues, including the provision of the tourism accommodation mix and
by the preparation of a structure plan and/ of information on existing tourism, can experience competing demands from • a family holiday home, periodically
or local development plan as appropriate. aspirations for long-term tourism and tourists, long-stay tenants, temporary workers offered as a short- term rental;
These plans should be required prior to existing problems related to tourism. and people seeking alternatives to traditional • a property purchased for the sole
subdivision or development approval.
rental accommodation. In addition, the intent of operating a short-term rental
• Where tourism and/or short- term rental
demand for land in tourist locations has operation; and
accommodation is significant to the
5.2 Local planning strategy locality or region, the local planning contributed to numerous caravan park • spare bedrooms and areas within a
closures throughout Western Australia.
considerations strategy should include substantial home, offered to let on a short- term
detail on issues such as accommodation basis.
Strategic planning for caravan parks should:
The local planning strategy provides the supply and demand, the rationale for
long-term planning directions and actions determining future land allocation (site • ensure development and long- term The success of online booking platforms
to manage the change and development of size and location), suitable planning retention of caravan parks as a form of offering short-term rental accommodation
a local government area. The local planning controls and anticipated tourism short-stay (affordable) accommodation has seen a rapid increase in short-term
strategy also provides the line-of-sight infrastructure needs. primarily for leisure tourists; rentals, with high concentrations occurring in
between state-wide strategic planning and popular tourist locations. Demand can also
policy to the local framework and decision- • Identify suitable tourism sites and • recognise that the commercial be high in localities attracting non-tourism
making. Local governments are encouraged precincts in accordance with locational sustainability of caravan parks requires related travel, such as medical, education
to address tourism as a planning issue/ criteria developed by the local some flexibility in product mix, site and business travel. In some cases, the rapid
government and ensure these are design and risk mitigation approaches;
and

Position Statement:
4
Planning for Tourism and Short-term Rental Accommodation
November 2024
growth in the short-term rental market has Considerations may include: 5.2.2.2 Location of short-term rental • Locations to minimise adverse interface
placed management and compliance stress accommodation issues, particularly amenity impacts on
• identification and assessment of current
on local governments and can have a variety surrounding residential and other land
and future short-term rental demands
of negative flow on effects. Short term rental accommodation should uses (for example rural).
informed by Tourism Western Australia
generally be a permitted use in tourism
data, the WA Government’s short- • Risk of natural hazards, particularly
Local government should consider whether zones.
term rental accommodation register, bushfire, and the extent of measures
detailed attention needs to be given to
short-term rental accommodation in the local Australian Bureau of Statistics data, Outside tourism zones, consideration should which may need to be in place to
planning strategy. In areas where short-term local government data as well as other be given to the appropriate location of short- address the level of risk.
rentals are in low demand and do not cause planning documents; term rental accommodation; specifically • Any other relevant planning
significant community concern, addressing • identification of short-term rental where it should be prioritised to further consideration and/or policy instruments
the topic within the local planning strategy accommodation opportunities; and strategic planning objectives, enhance within the planning framework.
may be unnecessary. the tourism experience and avoid adverse
• interaction between short-term rental impacts on surrounding land uses.
accommodation demand and local 5.3 Bushfire planning
5.2.2.1 Supply, demand and
housing objectives. In seeking to guide the location of short-term
requirements
pressures associated
rental accommodation outside Tourism
with short-term rental
Evidence from other jurisdictions (and zones, the following considerations may be There are no requirements within State
accommodation
increasingly from tourism locations in the relevant to the local government: Planning Policy 3.7 Bushfire (SPP 3.7) and
South West) indicates that a rapid growth Planning for Bushfire Guidelines (the
To help understand current and emerging • Provision of, and access to, tourist
in, or high supply of, short- term rentals may Guidelines) for hosted or unhosted short-
trends and issues, local governments are amenity, proximity to social, cultural,
affect the availability of long-term rentals and term rental accommodation.
encouraged to undertake a short-term and leisure attractions and accessibility
housing choice for permanent residents of a
rental accommodation supply and demand to transport routes and public transport
community. Where a regional local government
analysis. A supply and demand analysis services.
determines that a development application
should include consideration of the short-
Local governments with areas subject • Localities where short-term rental for short-term rental accommodation
term rental market, the relationship with
to a high supply of short- term rental accommodation may be particularly in is required, and the development site is
permanent housing provisions and the
accommodation and relatively stable housing demand for non-tourism needs, such as within a bushfire prone area, then the local
traditional accommodation provision.
growth are encouraged to monitor the temporary workers accommodation and government will need to specify any relevant
This analysis could be undertaken as a
situation in their communities and adjust medical travel, and how these should be bushfire requirements in a local planning
sub-section of broader population and
policy settings as appropriate. balanced with demand from tourism. policy.
housing studies conducted as part of the
local planning strategy, to ensure all relevant • Adequate standard of services and
housing supply and demand matters are infrastructure necessary, for example
considered holistically. reticulated or drinking water supply and
service, capacity of on-site solutions.

Position Statement:
5
Planning for Tourism and Short-term Rental Accommodation
November 2024
5.4 Statutory planning discretion, local government may utilise local • encourage the development and Development control measures can be set
planning policies to inform land use and redevelopment of caravan parks in a through local planning schemes and local
considerations
development decisions. manner that responds appropriately to planning policies to manage size, location,
The local planning scheme and supporting the environment, economy and context. and potential amenity impacts. Short-
local planning instruments (such as local The Guidelines provide further guidance term rental accommodation providers and
planning policies) give effect to local strategic on statutory planning considerations and The rezoning of Tourism or Special Use decision-makers should also consider any
planning through statutory land use and approaches. – Caravan Park zoned sites to residential, broader legislative requirements that may
development control. commercial or alike zones is generally apply such as smoke alarms, Residual Current
5.4.1 Caravan parks considered inconsistent with the objectives Devices (RCDs), compliant barriers for private
Broadly speaking, local planning schemes of this Position Statement. However, if a swimming pool and spas, food service
and amendments should: To support the policy objectives a local rezoning is proposed it should be justified requirements and requirements under the
planning scheme should: and assessed in the context of this Position National Construction Code.
• include a range of tourism, special
Statement, the Guidelines and the relevant
use and mixed-use zonings allowing • zone caravan park sites to secure local planning strategy.
5.4.2.1 Hosted short-term rental
for tourism development and the continuing use of the site for caravan
accommodation
permissibility of land uses in each zone, park and appropriate incidental uses, Where it can be demonstrated that a
to provide for a diverse tourism industry having regard for local context (Tourism caravan park site is no longer required, and
Hosted accommodation is considered
consistent with the direction provided in and Special Use/Special Use – Caravan this is supported by the Western Australian
a low-scale form of short-term rental
local planning strategy; Park zones are preferred for this purpose); Planning Commission (WAPC) in consultation
accommodation because the host resides
with relevant stakeholders, including long-
• utilise land use definitions as set out in • designate caravan parks as a permitted on the site and can manage any issues that
stay tenants, the WAPC may recommend
and LPS Regulations for tourism and (P) or discretionary (D) use in the Tourism may arise with respect to amenity, noise and
that the Minister for Planning approve
short-term accommodation uses, as zone or designate sites as Special Use/ other impacts. It may also be contended that
the rezoning; subject to all other relevant
applicable; Special Use – Caravan Park zones, and the short-term rental accommodation use of
planning considerations.
provide for a range of complementary the property is incidental to the permanent
• provide clear guidance as to the
incidental uses including additional residential use.
permissibility of tourism and short-term tourism accommodation types where 5.4.2 Short-term rental
rental accommodation land use types appropriate; accommodation It is intended that hosted accommodation,
in all relevant zones via the zoning
where the owner or occupier of the dwelling
table, in accordance with the guidance • consider designating caravan park as an Short-term rental accommodation is is present when guests are staying overnight,
provided in this Position Statement and Additional Use for specific sites outside considered a distinct land use class to should not require a development approval,
accompanying guidelines. the Tourism and Special Use/Special Use traditional tourist accommodation and is and should be represented as such in the
– Caravan Park zones where caravan and divided into two categories: hosted and zoning table.
Where planning scheme provisions are camping may be desired as a secondary unhosted. Local planning schemes can
inconsistent with this Position Statement, offering to the primary use; and manage the location of unhosted short-
local planning schemes must be updated.
term rental accommodation through
To complement local planning scheme
a combination of zoning and land use
provisions and guide the exercise of
permissibility.

Position Statement:
6
Planning for Tourism and Short-term Rental Accommodation
November 2024
5.4.2.2 Unhosted short-term rental This exemption will have effect wherever the Outside Perth Metropolitan Area General Local Planning
accommodation Metropolitan Region Scheme applies and will (including Peel) Considerations
be reflected in all applicable local planning
Local government should regulate unhosted For local governments in regional areas (i.e., The regulatory and policy response of the
schemes, via Schedule 2 ‘deemed provisions’
short-term rental accommodation through outside the Metropolitan Region Scheme) local government toward unhosted short
of the LPS Regulations. It will also still apply
its local planning framework to supplement – zoning table and scheme provisions for term rental accommodation should be
within bushfire prone areas.
broader State Government reforms on this unhosted short term rental accommodation proportional to the significance of the issues
matter. Where short-term rental accommodation will be at the discretion of the individual local arising in a municipality, especially in regional
is occurring as unhosted for more than 90 government. This is in recognition of the areas.
It is acknowledged that there have
nights in a 12-month period, the intensity of need to provide greater flexibility for regional
traditionally been various approaches to the In determining the appropriate way to
the use and form of activity changes from local governments, acknowledging that
regulation of unhosted short-term rental further tailor unhosted short-term rental
a permanent residential dwelling. There there are various approaches dependent on
accommodation currently undertaken across accommodation requirements, the following
is the potential for impacts on the locality, local community demographics, housing
Western Australia. This Position Statement statutory planning mechanisms can be
particularly in relation to residential amenity, availability and tourism markets.
sets out considerations in both metropolitan considered:
as well as broader housing supply objectives.
and regional contexts. For the purposes Local governments in regional areas are
Accordingly, use of a dwelling as unhosted • Utilising the zoning table, and other
of this section of the Position Statement, encouraged to update their schemes as
short-term rental accommodation for longer scheme mechanisms to control the
references to ‘regional’ areas includes the Peel soon as practicable to provide guidance on
periods of time is considered a change of use locations whereby unhosted short-
region. where short-term rental accommodation
from a residential dwelling. term rental accommodation proposals
may or may not be acceptable within their
may be designated. Short-term
Perth Metropolitan Area For local governments within the Perth municipality, and importantly where it would
rental accommodation should only
Metropolitan Area– zoning table provisions be beneficial for a development application
be prohibited (X) in areas with low
Within the context of the Perth Metropolitan in all local planning schemes shall require to be received for these uses. Requiring a
residential amenity such as industrial
Area, renting of a dwelling for 90 nights or development approval (i.e. a D or A use) for development approval will allow the local
zones. Guidance tailored to specific
less within a 12-month period, such as when unhosted short-term rental accommodation government to assess the impacts of a
localities or planning considerations
the owner is on holidays from their primary uses outside of tourism zones exceeding 90 specific proposal on both the amenity of a
where short-term rental accommodation
place of residence, is considered to be low nights within a 12-month period. locality and local housing markets, as well as
is discretionary can be provided
scale in impact and incidental to the primary the impacts on the local tourism economy
This single set of rules for Perth will ensure through local planning policies or other
use of the property. Therefore, short-term of their area (if applicable). There should also
greater consistency across the metropolitan appropriate scheme mechanisms.
rental accommodation operators that let out be a focus on the use of a dwelling and how
area and will allow the local government to
their residence for 90 nights or less within a this relates to local planning objectives and • Capping guest numbers permitted
assess individual proposals on a case-by-case
12-month period will not need development amenity impacts. within a short-term rental
basis, allowing consultation to occur where
approval. accommodation property through
deemed necessary.
local planning policy and/or condition
of a planning approval, to respond to
constraints such as availability of vehicle
parking, capacity of infrastructure (such

Position Statement:
7
Planning for Tourism and Short-term Rental Accommodation
November 2024
as onsite effluent disposal) or to maintain – bushfire emergency procedures and • Incorporate those facilities associated titling of caravan parks is not permitted as
appropriate levels of amenity in line options for evacuation. with tourist accommodation provided by the Strata Titles Act 1985 and
with expectations (such as concerns developments such as recreation, Community Titles Act 2018.
If appropriate, initial development approval
regarding “party houses”). entertainment and integrated
can be granted for a limited period (for
management.
Local government
• Utilising a local planning policy to guide example 12 months) and renewed on
discretionary decision- making, which a longer basis (for example three to five • Provide for current and future tourism
Local governments shall have regard to
may include but not be limited to: years, or permanently) to ensure there is demand.
this Position Statement along with other
appropriate management of potential
– locational factors which may • Have the capacity to accommodate the relevant considerations in the assessment of
impacts on the amenity of neighbouring
assist in determining appropriate necessary services, management and development applications for tourism land
properties.
locations for unhosted forms of support facilities without compromising uses and sites zoned for tourism purposes.
short- term rental accommodation the character, development flexibility or
within residential areas (refer to the 5.4.3 Other planning processes tourism amenity of the site.
Guidelines for further information); including structure
plans, subdivisions and • Provide for the retention or
– impact on local housing market, development applications enhancement of the strategic value of
where this has been identified as an the site for tourism purposes, including
issue in the local planning strategy; the relationship between individual lots
WAPC
and areas of high tourism amenity and
– limits to the number of guests and/
the potential to accommodate current
or rooms; Where appropriate, the WAPC will consider
and future tourism demand.
the application of this Position Statement
– provision of car parking;
in the assessment of structure plans, • Result in the subdivision of a large
– minimum stay or booking subdivision, strata, community titles and tourism lot (for example, to separate the
requirements (e.g. 2 nights); development applications on sites zoned residential component from the tourism).
for tourism purposes or where tourism or This may result in tourism lots remaining
– minimum services such as potable short-term rental accommodation uses can undeveloped and future pressure to
water and reticulated sewerage; be considered. approve further residential components
– preparation and approval of a to finance development.
In assessing proposals on land zoned for
Management Plan;
tourism purposes the WAPC will, among In the case of subdivision of an existing
– waste management; other things (including adopted plans and caravan park, subdivision is generally not
policies) consider whether the proposal will: supported. Excising a portion of a caravan
– whether pets of guests (such as
park site may be supported if the excised
• Facilitate the development of a quality,
dogs) are permitted;
portion is proposed to be developed for a
sustainable tourism facility.
– managing for potential noise compatible tourism use. Strata or community
nuisance; and