OFFICIAL
Local Planning
Policy 3.1
Fremantle City Centre &
Northern Gateway
fremantle.wa.gov.au

OFFICIAL
LPP 3.1: Fremantle City Centre & Northern
Gateway
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. This policy may be cited as Local Planning
Policy 3.1 – Fremantle City Centre & Northern Gateway (LPP 3.1).
Introduction
The purpose of this policy is to provide built form and design guidance to areas within the
Fremantle City Centre and Northern Gateway.
Objectives
The objectives of this policy are to:
• Provide built form guidance to facilitate high quality development in the City Centre
and Northern Gateway areas.
• Provide design guidance for new development which complements the existing
character and heritage of the precinct areas.
• Provide guidance to facilitate the activation of the city centre and northern gateway
areas through residential and non-residential uses.
• Ensure that new development reinforces and enhances important views.
• Facilitate a safe and appealing pedestrian friendly environment.
• Ensure the new development demonstrates best practice environmentally
sustainable design.
Application of this Policy
This policy applies to all land indicated on the map below (Figure 1). Where a development
proposes to vary the policy criteria, the development must demonstrate compliance with
the objectives of this policy and the relevant design principles of the Residential Design
Codes (R-Codes).
This policy is to be read in conjunction with Local Planning Scheme No.4, in particular,
Schedule 7, Local Planning Area 1 - City Centre and Local Planning Area 2 – Fremantle.
Where this policy is inconsistent with the Scheme or an adopted structure plan or local
development plan, that instrument shall prevail to the extent of any inconsistency. Where
this policy is inconsistent with a more general local planning policy, this policy shall prevail
to the extent of any inconsistency.
1/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 1: Policy Area
Policy Provisions
1. Precincts 1 and 2
1.1. Vision and desired character
For all new developments or where a development proposes to significantly alter the built
form of an existing building, applicants are required to submit a design statement that
explains how the proposed development responds to the vision and desired character
statements relevant to the development’s location (see figure 1). The response to the
desired character is particularly important regarding the proposed development’s
relationship to the streetscape or public space.
2/33

OFFICIAL
Precinct 1 – Northern Gateway
The precinct will be rejuvenated as a vibrant, attractive and sustainable high density
residential neighbourhood within walkable distance of the Fremantle city centre that
provides a diverse range of housing and commercial opportunities with a neighbourhood
feel. It will provide convenient, safe and attractive pedestrian and cyclist links that
connect to the City Centre and its public transport node, nearby public open spaces,
education, recreation and community facilities.
This precinct will provide a distinctive and highly visible statement as the northern
gateway to the city centre. This will be supported by a hub of local commercial and
community services that complements but does not compete with the city centre’s
commercial focus. Heritage buildings will be retained, re-used and integrated with new
infill development. New development within the precinct will contribute to the greening of
the City.
Precinct 1 will focus on Queen Victoria Street as a distinctive boulevard entry to Fremantle
and with a lively street space of active ground level frontages providing a mixture of
service, sales and hospitality with high density residential accommodation above and
behind. The precinct aims to provide a diverse range of housing opportunities in a city
centre location with a neighbourhood feel.
Sub-Precinct A: An entrance to Fremantle
a) New development should showcase a contemporary design with high quality
finishes.
b) It should reflect a high-density residential area that values environmental
sustainability and fosters a vibrant cultural and artistic community.
c) Design should be strongly influenced by natural features such as the river,
escarpment, and Cantonment Hill, reinforcing the area as a gateway to Fremantle.
d) Development on Beach Street should be built on the building line, highlighting both
the street edge and the former river shoreline.
e) Development should reinforce the district urban wall that is a characteristic of
Beach Street fronting the port.
f) Development should contribute to local identity, ensuring a clear sense of place
within the Fremantle entrance.
Sub-Precinct B: Robust, port related activities
a) Combine new infill buildings with adaptive reuse of existing structures.
b) New development should be sympathetic to retained heritage buildings and places.
c) New development on Beach Street should be built on the building line to reinforce
the edge of the street and the former river foreshore. It should reinforce the
distinct urban wall that is a characteristic of Beach Street fronting the port.
d) New development should be designed to enhance local distinctiveness and foster a
recognisable sense of place.
3/33

OFFICIAL
e) Create distinct visual and functional differences between sub-precincts B and C.
New development in sub-precinct B should generally reflect the area’s robust,
industrial character with the use of the following:
o Functionality rather than overly refined decorative elements;
o Strong definition of light and shadow on highly articulated facades; and
o Use of face brickwork as the predominant material to reflect the precincts
industrial heritage.
Sub-Precinct C: Contemporary urban mixed use influences
a) This sub-precinct provides the opportunity to introduce new architectural
compositions and points of interest, creating a distinct residential identity within
the modern port city context.
b) While sub-precincts B and C may share built characteristics, new development
should respond to the opportunity to clearly differentiate their architectural
character.
c) New development should reflect:
o Lower scale and finer urban grain, respecting the small lot sizes and narrow
frontages;
o Development on amalgamated lots should retain the finer grain of the
original subdivisions;
o Refined detailing suited to its location away from the port’s edge;
o Respond to the unique streetscapes of both Queen Victoria Street and
Quarry Street;
o Less emphasis on brick facades compared to sub-precinct B; and
o Strong definition of light and shadow on highly articulated facades.
Precinct 2 – City Centre
The precinct is the centre of the City’s civic, retail, commercial and residential activity.
This is clearly recognised through the intensity of activity and scale of development. It
aims to attract new residents and high value business activity as a part of the broader
Fremantle sense of place and lifestyle. At its heart lies Walyalup Koort, the City’s civic
centre and a revitalised commercial hub. The area combines key retail anchors with active
shopping streets and a diverse mix of uses that ensure continuous activity throughout the
week and into the evenings.
The precinct blends innovative new buildings with retained heritage, creating a distinctive
yet respectful urban character. New developments will reflect the community’s
commitment to environmental sustainability and showcase high-quality design suited to
the central city location. The built form supports both vibrant public spaces and increased
density, accommodating more residents and workers while promoting a sustainable future.
With the city’s highest concentration of residents and businesses, the precinct is well-
connected by public transport and pedestrian-friendly routes, reinforcing its role as
4/33

OFFICIAL
Fremantle’s most accessible and active district. New development within the precinct will
contribute to the greening of the City.
Sub-Precinct D: Mid-century wool stores influence
a) New development should reflect the massing, streetscape scale and proportioning
of the remnant 1927 and 1950s Elders Woolstores building. However, it may
embody contemporary detailing, materials and finishes associated with the new
uses of these large street blocks.
b) The massing and scaling of new development should reinstate the district urban
wall along Elder Place fronting the port that was previously provided by the historic
wool storage buildings.
c) New development in sub-precinct D should generally reflect the area’s robust,
industrial character with the use of the following:
o Functionality rather than overly refined decorative elements;
o Strong definition of light and shadow on highly articulated facades; and
o Use of face brickwork as the predominant material to reflect the precincts
industrial heritage.
Sub-Precinct E: Diverse contemporary influence
a) There is the opportunity to transform this area with new character resulting from
contemporary architecture that promotes the identity, function and culture of a
modern port city.
b) Reflect progressive environmental sustainability through elements including, but
not limited to, material selection, on structure greening and climate passive design.
c) Reflect the vibrant cultural and artistic community that values the importance of
social life in public spaces.
d) Showcase the functional and working purpose of the area, rather than being over-
refined or decorative, and incorporate the use of robust and utilitarian materials
with natural finishes.
e) Celebrate and reflect the coastal setting and strong definition of light and shadow
on highly articulated facades.
f) New development presenting to Walyalup Koort should contribute to re-establishing
the historic civic urban character of Walyalup Koort as well as contributing to a
vibrant, coherent urban space defined and enclosed by buildings and landscape.
g) The ‘city triangle’ in Walyalup Koort is to continue to have a clear civic identity and
development is to be of the highest quality and demonstrate a high standard of
sustainable building design.
Sub-Precinct F: Gold rush mixed use influence
a) New development should be strongly influenced by the existing character,
streetscape surrounds and adjoining buildings.
5/33

OFFICIAL
b) Whilst new development may convey an overall contemporary design and style, the
new development should reflect the traditional proportioning, streetscape scale,
materials and verandah treatments of the historic buildings, particularly the design
characteristics associated with traditional ground floor retail and commercial land
uses.
c) Development opposite the State Heritage listed West End is to protect and enhance
the setting of the heritage area.
1.2 Public Realm
New developments throughout the precincts are to activate street frontages through
design and by location of appropriate uses to create a vibrant, diverse, interactive and
safe urban environment.
Unless specific discretionary criteria are stated in the provisions below, Council may, at its
discretion, vary any of the provisions where it is satisfied the development meets the
overall objective of the element.
6/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 2: Public Realm
Primary Streets
New development located on the primary streets are to address the following provisions:
a) Lower levels of the development should be designed to reinforce the significance of
the primary street with an appropriate scale and high standard of details, materials
and finishes, and shall incorporate design measures to contribute to an interesting,
safe and diverse public realm. The ground floor façade should provide variation and
interest at a human scale.
b) No vehicle access, blank walls and/or service areas should be located on primary
street frontages where alternative locations are available. If vehicle access is
7/33

OFFICIAL
necessary from the primary street, vehicle entrance points and service areas are to
be integrated into the overall building design to minimise their impact on the
pedestrian environment and street vitality. Vehicle crossovers are to be minimised,
consolidated and shared where possible.
c) Ground level parking should be sleeved behind or within a development, ensuring
the streetscape is not dominated by car parking.
d) Precinct 1: Where residential uses are located at the ground level frontage,
development should:
• Incorporate design measures in the façade to contribute to an interesting public
realm;
• Minimise blank walls to no more than 3m in width;
• Locate private open space(s) and major openings to provide passive
surveillance and interaction with the adjacent public realm;
• Achieve a clear distinction between the private place and public space, through
the use of landscaping, visually permeable fencing a maximum of 750mm in
height or a difference in floor level of up to 600mm from the street; and
• Accommodate multiple ground level pedestrian entries directly from the street.
e) Precinct 2: Non-residential uses are to be located at ground level and be designed
for adaptive re-use.
f) Precinct 1 (where illustrated in figure 2) and Precinct 2: Non-residential uses at the
ground level frontage to a primary street should:
• Be encouraged to incorporate a mix of active land uses at ground level that
extend the hours of activity in the adjacent public domain beyond the
traditional retail hours.
• Be predominantly glazed or open to the street at ground level and with major
pedestrian entrances direct from and level with the street.
• Accommodate multiple ground level commercial tenancies in long frontages
which shall all obtain their main public pedestrian entry directly from and level
with the primary street. Wide building frontages with a single use or tenancy
shall be limited.
• Have any area where the building is setback from the front lot boundary be
designed and treated as part of the adjacent pedestrian domain.
• Minimise side setbacks and other gaps in the street frontage to provide a
frontage that is as continuous as possible.
• Provide weather protection along footpaths for pedestrians, either in the form of
awnings or first floor balconies, and satisfy all of the following:
- To be continuous along all primary street frontages;
- To be integrated with the building design, appropriately scaled and designed
to reinforce the importance of primary streets while still providing shelter
and a sense of enclosure for pedestrians;
8/33

OFFICIAL
- To be permanently fixed and constructed of materials that provide sun and
rain protection (i.e. high degree of sun shading and water impenetrability);
- To project a minimum horizontal distance of 2.4m over the adjacent
footpath; and
- Awnings shall have a consistent clear height form footpath level of between
3m and 3.5m.
Council may, at its discretion, vary any of the above requirements where:
- The installation of weather protection would be incompatible with the
heritage significance of the existing building; or
- It is necessary to ensure appropriate clearances from the street
infrastructure or trees; or
- The installation of weather protection would present significant practical
difficulties in terms of vehicle accessibility and there is no satisfactory
alternative design solution available.
g) Precinct 2: The full extent of the St Johns Church triangle in Walyalup Koort is to
be reinforced as a generally green passive space.
h) Precinct 2: Footpath widths are to be maximised along primary streets. For the lots
on High Street and Adelaide Street indicated in red in figure 2, primary street
setbacks shall correlate with the widened road reserve on adjoining lots.
Secondary Streets
New development located on secondary streets is to address the following provisions:
a) Ground level frontages to secondary streets may incorporate a mix of land uses.
b) Development is to incorporate design and passive surveillance measures to
contribute to an interesting, safe and diverse public realm.
c) Blank walls to secondary street frontages should be minimised to no more than 3m
in width.
d) Where residential uses are located at ground level, the design should achieve a
clear distinction between private place and public space whilst still allowing for
passive surveillance and interaction with the street.
e) Retail and commercial floorspace shall provide major pedestrian entries directly
from and level with the street.
f) Weather protection along the footpaths of secondary streets adjoining
retail/commercial/entertainment uses shall be provided either in the form of
awnings or first floor balconies, and satisfy the following:
• To be integrated with the building design;
• To be predominantly fixed and constructed of materials that provide sun and
rain protection (i.e. a high degree of sun shading and water impenetrability);
9/33

OFFICIAL
• The weather protection shall project a minimum horizontal distance of 2m over
the adjacent footpath; and
• Awnings shall have a consistent clear height above the footpath of 2.75m.
Council may, at its discretion, vary any of the above requirements where:
• The installation of weather protection would be incompatible with the heritage
significance of the existing building;
• It is necessary to ensure appropriate clearances from the street infrastructure
or trees; or
• The installation of weather protection would present significant practical
difficulties in terms of vehicle accessibility and there is no satisfactory
alternative design solution available.
g) Vehicle entrance points and service areas are to be integrated into the overall
building design and shall minimise detraction from the pedestrian environment and
street vitality. Vehicle crossovers are to be minimised, consolidated and shared
where possible.
h) Precinct 1: On-site vehicle parking at ground level adjacent to a secondary street
should be screened and incorporate design measures to contribute to an interesting
and safe public realm.
i) Precinct 2: Ground level on-site parking should be sleeved behind or within a
development, ensuring the streetscape is not dominated by vehicle parking.
Major off-street pedestrian routes
a) Provision of the major off-street routes that are accessible by the public are
strongly encouraged in new development at the general locations shown in figure
2.
b) The exact course and location of these major off-street routes don’t necessarily
need to align between street blocks, but connections between them are to be
legible.
c) Major off-street routes are to be designed to be safe for users in accordance with
Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) principles.
d) Universal access is required for the whole length of off-street routes from street to
street.
e) Additional pedestrian connections shall be provided from the major off-street route
to any on-site public or communal space.
f) Ground level frontages to major off-street routes may incorporate a mix of land
uses.
g) Ground level frontages to major off-street routes are to incorporate design and
passive surveillance measures to contribute to an interesting, safe and diverse
public realm.
10/33

OFFICIAL
h) Upper-level balconies over the major off-street route are encouraged.
i) Weather protection, in the form of awnings or first floor balconies, is to be provided
over the footpaths of major off-street routes where adjoining any
retail/commercial/entertainment uses and shall provide a minimum clear height
above footpath level of 2.75m. Elsewhere along the major off-street route, there
can be a mix of covered space and open to the sky.
j) Refer to section 1.4 of this policy for specific requirements where the provision of
off-street pedestrian links is a criterion for seeking discretionary additional building
height (refer to figure 2 for locations).
1.3 Built form and legibility
Figure 3 - Views and landmarks illustrates the major views, major landmarks and desired
views and glimpses within Precincts 1 and 2. New development is to provide comfortable
enclosure to streets and other public spaces, reinforce important views, and provide
activation and safety in public spaces through the relationship between the building and
the adjacent public space.
Unless specific discretionary criteria are stated in the provisions below, Council may, at its
discretion, vary any of the provisions where it is satisfied the development contributes to
the overall objective of this element.
11/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 3: Views and Landmarks
Development shall address the following provisions:
a) The significance of Queen Victoria Street as a major approach and gateway to the
City Centre should be reinforced through the scale and massing of new
development and the framing of views towards Princess May Park and the City
Centre.
b) The significance of primary streets (including Queen Victoria Street) should be
reinforced with continuous developed edges of consistent scale and massing that
creates a strong sense of urban enclosure as well as framing and reinforcing views
to major Fremantle landmarks that provide legibility and contribute to the City’s
image.
12/33

OFFICIAL
c) Views of Fremantle landmarks, particularly to the port and of port infrastructure,
the Arts Centre and the former Army Barracks, are encouraged wherever possible
at ground level along secondary streets, via off-street pedestrian links and other
openings between buildings, and from upper levels of new buildings.
d) Consider the impact of new development on long views from approach routes by
road and rail, from Monument Hill, Cantonment Hill, Victoria Quay and Fremantle
Harbour. Consideration is to be given to the impact of the arrangement and bulk of
taller buildings and the design of roofs and screening of rooftop service elements.
New development shall contribute positively to these views.
e) Passive surveillance of the street and other public spaces is to be provided by
frequent upper floor windows, terraces and balconies overlooking the public space.
f) Incorporate sensitive transitions between lower scale existing heritage buildings
and taller structures where they are directly adjoining.
g) As redevelopment of the area is likely to be carried out over a number of years,
consideration should be given to the appropriate treatment of all walls and
parapets that will be visible or remain semi-permanently exposed.
h) Redevelopment of full street blocks and other large sites should ensure integration
into their surroundings and maintain consistency with the precinct’s development
pattern and street level linkages. The horizontal expanse of long facades should
address the desired character of its location through articulation and fenestration,
architectural detailing and treatment of rooflines.
1.4 Discretionary additional building height
Under the Local Planning Scheme No. 4 provisions of Schedule 7, Local Planning Area 1 –
Sub Area 1.3.2 and Local Planning Area 2 – Sub Area 2.3.1, additional building height may
be approved on select sites (refer to figure 4), at the Council’s discretion, subject to the
development satisfying a number of criteria. This section of the policy provides additional
guidance and requirements regarding what the development should provide for the
Council to be satisfied that the discretionary criteria have been met.
13/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 4: Sites where discretionary height may be permitted
a) The following supporting documents are to be submitted as part of an application
where discretionary additional building height is sought:
• Full streetscape studies at pedestrian level showing the impact of the additional
height on the public realm and neighbouring sites or buildings;
• Site and precinct plans showing the impact of the additional height on view
corridors and view sheds;
• Report from independent consultant assessing the development’s
environmental performance; and
• If the development is to be staged, the applicant must demonstrate how each
stage will make its own positive contribution to the precinct and the street.
14/33

OFFICIAL
b) The applicant must demonstrate how the proposed development satisfies the
following criteria:
• Policy provisions to be satisfied to the highest standards
Discretionary additional building height will only be considered where all of the
relevant provisions elsewhere in this policy have been satisfied to the very
highest standards.
• Distinctive architecture and exceptional design quality
The development is to be of distinctive architecture befitting its location and
exceptional design quality meeting the highest possible standard of design
principles contained in the Local Planning Scheme and/or local planning policy
that assist in determining the design of development, and including, but not
limited to:
- The overall development achieving an exceptionally high standard in terms
of appearance;
- The development demonstrating a selection of high quality building
materials, sustainable building measures and building longevity;
- The design addressing the relationship of taller components to lower levels
(podium);
- The impact of the development on distinct views;
- The additional height does not adversely impact on the ability of
neighbouring sites and buildings to maximise their passive sustainable
design potential;
- The visual permeability of the development with the streetscape;
- The roofscape and servicing aspects of the development are exceptionally
well resolved.
In particular, the architectural response of the development to the desired
character of its setting and the way the development will contribute to (and
raise) the architectural standard of development within the precinct will be of
primary consideration for the Council.
• Best practice environmentally sustainable design
Where required in Local Planning Scheme No. 4, Planning Areas 1 and 2,
Council will consider a minimum certified Green Star rating of 5 Stars using the
Green Building Council Australia’s current rating tools where an appropriate
Green Star rating tool exists, to demonstrate best practice in environmentally
sustainable design (ESD).
Where a current Green Star rating tool is not available for the proposed type of
development, an alternative method of demonstrating Australian excellence in
ESD may be used, at the discretion of Council, which addresses the following
elements:
15/33

OFFICIAL
- Energy – encourage and recognise designs that substantially reduce the
greenhouse gas emissions associated with the operational energy
consumption;
- Water – encourage reduction of potable water through the efficient design
of building systems, rainwater collection and water re-use;
- Indoor Environment Quality – encourage and recognise designs that ensure
thermal comfort of occupants, maximise daylight while minimising heat
glare, reduce noise pollution and require maintenance and cleaning of air
handling systems; and
- Waste – encourage and recognise designs and construction methods that
reduce the amount of natural resources used, reuse whatever materials can
be re-used and recycle wherever possible.
Assessment of best practice in ESD for development, considering the above
criteria, can be demonstrated by applying the benchmarking standards
incorporated within the Green Star Rating Tool and Technical Manual as
applicable to a 5 Star Green Star rating relative to the appropriate building
type. Where an appropriate Green Star rating tool does not currently exist,
Green Star Office shall be used for commercial projects and Green Star Multi
Unit Residential shall be used for mixed use projects for this purpose.
In addition to the above requirements, it must also be demonstrated that an
Accredited Green Star professional has been appointed to the project design
team.
• Impact on the amenity of surrounding public realm
The applicant shall illustrate that the additional building height does not
detrimentally increase the amount of shade or wind surrounding public spaces
beyond what could be expected from the development that was constructed to
the permitted building heights.
• High quality landscaped and publicly accessible pedestrian environment
The off-street pedestrian links shown in figure 2 must be provided, and in
addition to the requirements in section 1.2, must be:
- A minimum width of 5m;
- Open to public access at all times;
- To a high standard of landscape design incorporating planting, public
seating and public art; and
- Safely designed to Crime Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTED)
Standards to be confirmed by a report by an accredited CPTED consultant.
The area of required street setback in Queen Street, High Street and Adelaide
Street are to be transferred at no cost to the Council (refer to figure 2 for
locations).
16/33

OFFICIAL
New development is to address the provision of a high standard of on-site open
space for residents and/or workers, which may include rooftop landscape areas.
c) Precinct 2: Affordable housing
Where affordable housing is provided it shall be fully integrated into the
development and not be externally identifiable as a separate component of the
development.
A condition will be included on the planning approval to ensure the ongoing
provision of the approved affordable housing component.
2. Precinct 3
Refer to Schedule 7, Local Planning Area 2 – Sub Area 2.3.1 of the Local Planning
Scheme for specific development controls relating to this precinct. This section
provides additional provisions and guidance for new development in this precinct,
identified in figure 5 below.
Figure 5: Provisions relating to Precinct 3
17/33

OFFICIAL
2.1 Vision and desired character
a) Presents an opportunity to accommodate high quality residential and mixed use
development as part of the City Centre’s northern gateway, located close to a wide
range of services and amenities.
b) Provides a transition between high-density mixed use zonings to the south and
west, and existing lower density development to the north.
2.2 Building setbacks
a) Notwithstanding the minimum lot boundary setback requirements of the Residential
Design Codes (R-Codes) Volume 1 and 2, walls built up to a lot boundary shall only
be permitted on the south-western boundary for the location and height indicated
in red in figure 5.
b) Remaining walls to buildings shall be setback from the lot boundaries in accordance
with Tables 2a and 2b of the R-Codes Volume 1 or Table 2.1 of the R-Codes
Volume 2, as applicable.
2.3 Public domain interface
a) Buildings shall address the public domain through orientation and provision of
major openings and/or balconies on all levels, to provide active and passive
surveillance options.
b) Fencing abutting Fremantle Park: minimum of two-thirds of the length is to be
visually permeable above 1.2m to a maximum height of 1.8m, with piers not
higher than 2m. For the balance of the fencing maximum solid portions to a
maximum height of 1.8m is permitted to facilitate screening of outdoor areas.
c) Direct pedestrian and resident access into the park should be provided.
d) Development fronting Fremantle Park: ground floor is to be no greater than
600mm above the level of the public open space adjacent to the site.
2.4 Landscaping and tree retention
a) Retention of trees on site and their integration onto the development is strongly
encouraged. Landscaping and the potential for tree retention and/or relocation
should be considered in site planning and will be assessed against the provisions of
the R-Codes Volume 1 and 2, as applicable.
b) A landscaping plan is to accompany all development applications which details the
type and location of landscaping treatments as well as vegetation to be retained on
site.
18/33

OFFICIAL
Local Planning Policy – Document Control
Version 13 May 2026 – Ordinary Meeting of Council - C2605-6
1 -
Public Consultation Yes
WAPC Approval Required? No
Next review date 13 May 2030
(maximum of four years from last review)
19/33

OFFICIAL
Appendix: Precinct Character
Purpose
The purpose of this appendix is to provide an overview of the history of the built environment
and the existing character of Precincts 1 to 3 as identified in Local Planning Policy 3.1:
Fremantle City Centre and Northern Gateway.
Precinct 1 and 3
Historical Overview
The precinct was established as a residential area and has undergone several distinct
periods of development to become a mixed use area broadly characterised by car
showrooms and yards, commercial developments with some residential use.
Period One 1830s – 1880s:
In the Early Victorian era this area was located on the outskirts of the town and the larger
blocks contained many substantial freestanding houses set in large gardens and often
positioned to take advantage of views and breezes from the river. Cantonment Road, later
named Queen Victoria Street, connected to the Fremantle Traffic Bridge and Stirling
Highway and was of the main entrances. Beach Street had not yet been constructed and
properties on the river side of the road extended down to the sandy riverbank.
The two-storey terrace housing at 18–24 Queen Victoria Street and the early part of Stella
Maris Seafarers Club are remnants of the residential development that date from this era.
Figure 1: View from Fremantle Town Hall looking towards Cantonment Hill, 1891
20/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 2: View from Precinct from Cantonment Hill circa 1903
Period Two 1890s – 1950s:
In the history of Fremantle, Period Two was the time of the most intense development
activity and largely set the city’s distinctive built form characteristics. This period began
with the Gold Boom that transformed Fremantle and Western Australia and continuing into
the Inter-War Era with the intensification of industry and port related uses following the
construction of the Inner Harbour and Victoria Quay.
The transformation of the Northern Gateway area began with the reclamation of the river
for new infrastructure projects, firstly for the railway in the 1880s and then for the
harbour in the 1890s. These works separated the precinct from the river and introduced
industrial and port related uses which made it less desirable as a residential area. In the
1890s the western side of the precinct adjacent to the railway and harbour began to
attract industrial uses such as foundries, ice works and breweries and in the Inter-war Era
substantial brick warehouses for wool storage were constructed creating a harbour
frontage with a robust industrial character. The buildings in Beach Street combined with
those further south in Elder Place (City Centre) to create a distinctive streetscape.
The former Dalgety Wool Stores (Heirloom Apartments), Warehouse 1 James Street,
former Fremantle Cold Storage 26-34 Queen Victoria Street, Commercial Building, 6 Parry
Street and Former SEC Sub-Station 10 Parry Street are remnants of this period of
development.
At the northern end of Queen Victoria Street, many of the early residences remained well
into the 1950s but they were gradually repurposed as boarding houses, nursing homes
and other community buildings. None of these houses survived the 1960s- 70s
redevelopment of the area.
21/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 3: View from Precinct from Cantonment Hill circa 1939
Figure 4: View of HMS Victorious and HMS Indomitable and the warehouses and industrial
buildings lining the harbour edge, 1945
Period Three 1960’s – present day:
The final stage of major development coincided with the advent of containerisation. The
resulting profound change to shipping and associated industries completely changed the
earlier interdependence between the precinct and the harbour. Since the 1960s industrial
and warehousing uses were gradually relocated to the new industrial areas on the
outskirts of Perth where land was cheap and close to road transport networks. In the
1960s the remaining single houses were demolished for car yards, petrol stations and low-
quality commercial strip style development. Development from the 1960s and 1970s
period is generally low grade, has little heritage significance and doesn’t make a positive
contribution to the character of the area.
22/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 5: Queen Victoria Street circa 1972
Figure 6: Queen Victoria Street circa 1974 Figure 7: Queen Victoria Street circa 2012
Figure 8: Queen Victoria Street circa 2025
23/33

OFFICIAL
Existing Character
The precinct contains 3 broadly distinguishable areas of differing character, as shown in
Figure 9.
Figure 9: Precinct 1 and 3 Character Areas
The quality of the buildings and their contribution to the precinct character varies greatly.
Almost all buildings that make a positive contribution to the precinct are associated with
Period Two and stand in Area B. The precinct has undergone several distinct periods of
development where earlier development has generally been supplanted by the later and
so to a degree the townscape qualities of the precinct are set by the pervasive low-quality
development from Period Three.
Area A:
While Area A is a primary entrance to Fremantle, it exhibits no strong unifying character.
Rather the area is comprised of buildings of a variety of architectural styles associated
with Period Three. The buildings are generally of low architectural quality and thus make a
limited contribution to producing a legible streetscape or a coherent area overall. The
exception would be the former warehouse on the corner of James and Beach Street which
forms the northernmost edge of the robust industrial harbour edge streetscape.
24/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 10: Area A Queen Victoria Street and Beach Street intersection
Figure 11: Area A Beach Street and James Street intersection
Area B:
While Area B does not exhibit a strongly unifying character, it contains several significant
streetscapes with differing character, massing and scale. The most significant of these
streetscapes is the harbour facing buildings in Beach Street which share a robust,
industrial character although the scale varies from the massive former Dalgetty Wool
Stores to more modest single storey warehouses. These utilitarian brick buildings exhibit
characteristics of the Federation and Inter-War Warehouse style and collectively they
define the urban edge where the city met the port.
At the southern end of Area B around Parry Street is a more traditional late nineteenth to
early twentieth century urban streetscape with two storey terrace housing in Queen
Victoria Street and the Australia Hotel and a two-storey commercial building in Parry
Street. These buildings are less robust and more detailed than the port related industrial
buildings and exhibit characteristics of the Federation Free Style of architecture.
25/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 12: Area B Beach Street frontage
Figure 13: Area B Beach Street frontage
Figure 14: Area B Industrial buildings, Queen Victoria Street
26/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 15: Area B former residential buildings Queen Victoria Street
Area C:
The northern block of Area C between Burt and James Streets was completely redeveloped
in the 1960s and 70s when the historic residential buildings were demolished for car yards
and commercial development. While this block has a fairly uniform built form character it
is low quality and has no heritage significance.
The southern block of Area C between James and Parry Streets contains some commercial
buildings from the early Twentieth Century which combine to create pockets of typical
mixed use commercial streetscape with a live edge of shopfronts and awning canopies
protecting the footpath. Surviving historic buildings have a finer grain and less robust
character than Area B and the buildings exhibit characteristics of Inter-War and Federation
Freestyle architectural styles. This area is dominated by recent multi-storey mixed used
buildings of a similar scale to the former Dalgetty Wool Stores on opposite in Area B.
Figure 16: Area C pocket of historic commercial buildings on Queen Victoria Street
27/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 17: Area C low quality late 20th Century development, Queen Victoria Street
Precinct 2
Historical Overview
The precinct was largely established in the Gold Boom era when Fremantle was
transformed by the prosperity and population growth resulting from the Gold Rushes.
Traditional mixed use urban buildings were constructed along the major roads of Market,
High, Cantonment and Adelaide Streets with more suburban style residential development
elsewhere. In the Inter-War era the residential area surrounding Cantonment Street was
transformed by a series of massive brick wool stores that were constructed adjacent to
Victoria Quay. Then in the Post War Era the largely residential areas to the north and east
of Kings Square were redeveloped as the commercial heart of the city drifted north and
east.
Existing Character
The precinct contains three broadly distinguishable areas of differing character, as shown
in Figure 18.
28/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 12: Precinct 2 Character Areas
Figure 18: Precinct 2 Character Areas
The following sections provide an overview of the existing and historic character of these
three areas.
Area D – Mid-century wool stores influence:
Area D consists of former wool stores buildings constructed from the 1930s to the 1950s
and the sites of two earlier wool stores which were demolished in the 1980s. These
massive brick warehouses lined Elder Place and Beach Street and collectively formed a
distinctive visual edge to harbour and served as an interface between the City and Victoria
Quay. The demolition of two of these buildings has diminished the character of this area.
Fremantle was established as the port town for Perth and this purpose underpinned its
distinct character and heritage. The wool stores buildings were constructed during a period
when the processing, storage and distribution of export and import commodities took
place within the near vicinity of the harbour. The architectural expression of their
utilitarian purpose, particularly their massiveness, contributed to an urban character that
differentiated Fremantle from other places in the metropolitan area.
29/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 19: Elders Wool stores Place
The elevational design of the wool stores is Classically influenced but utilitarian with a
simple rectangular plan and form and a bold, robust character. They were, or gave the
appearance of, load bearing red brick construction with quasi-structural expression on the
façades and contrasting rendered lintels and sills. The facades were highly modulated with
deep projecting piers and cornice elements and recessed windows and spandrels. The
large multi pane windows lit the storage area and south facing roof lights in the saw tooth
trussed roof illuminated the upper-level wool classing areas.
New developments in this area should echo the utilitarian, robust warehouses
characteristic of this area. Developments are expected to reflect the scale and materials
used in the heritage buildings in this area.
Figure 20: Woolstores Commercial Building
Area E – Contemporary influence:
Area E exhibits no strong unifying character and is comprised of buildings of varying size,
scale and era of development. The character is generally a mix of late Twentieth Century
and early Twenty-first century architectural styles with a few surviving buildings from the
Gold Boom era. The late Twentieth Century buildings are generally of low architectural
quality and thus make a limited contribution to legible streetscapes or to a coherent area
overall. This area is expected to accommodate more large-scale developments. These
developments should reflect the historic streetscape in a contemporary manner.
30/33

OFFICIAL
Figure 21: Poor quality, contemporary streetscapes, Point Street
Figure 22: Poor quality, contemporary streetscapes, Queen and High Streets
Figure 23: Contemporary streetscapes, Adelaide Street
Notwithstanding the lack of unifying character, there are some buildings and public spaces
of cultural heritage significance within the precinct that contribute to the social and civic
fabric of the area city overall. Notable examples are Kings and Queens Squares, Victoria
Hall and the Gold Boom era terraces at 19 - 25 Point Street. The former school buildings
31/33

OFFICIAL
at Princess May Reserve, the Proclamation Tree and St Patricks Basilica and Presbytery
also form a significant heritage group at the north end of the precinct.
Figure 24: Cluster of high-quality heritage buildings at the north end of Adelaide Street including St
Patrick Basilica and the former
Area E - Gold Boom mixed use influence:
Area E has a distinctive character as a largely intact urban commercial area from the late
nineteenth to early twentieth century. Most of the buildings were originally mixed-use with
shops at ground floor and commercial or residential uses above. Many of these buildings
are individually heritage protected, but collectively they have greater significance as part
of significant streetscapes.
These buildings were simply designed, usually rectangular in plan, with the front face
abutting the rear edge of the footpaths that lined the streets. The height of the buildings
ranged from between one to three storeys but is most commonly two storeys. The
buildings sometimes have a basement.
The design of these buildings displays a clear hierarchy of parts. Considerable attention
was given to the design of a suitably imposing street frontage whereas the minor facades,
although well built, were utilitarian in appearance.
All buildings are constructed at the rear edge of the footpath with zero front setback and
will also usually have zero setbacks on their side boundaries. The buildings combine to
form a street wall.
Figure 25: Mixed use, Gold Boom Era buildings, High Street
32/33

OFFICIAL
The main facades of the buildings show the influence of the classical style and display a
fineness of detail appropriate to their urban setting. The main facades of these building
are either symmetrical or designed as an asymmetrical composition containing
symmetrical elements within it. The facades are either completely rendered to give the
appearance of ashlar stonework and detailing or, more commonly, are composed of
rendered detailing and unpainted tuck-pointed brick walls. The corrugated iron roofs are
nearly always concealed behind a parapet which, depending on the design of the façade
below, sometimes contained a pediment.
The underlying classical influence is evident in the composition consisting of a base,
middle and top sections. The middle sections are modulated either simply by regularly
placed windows set in wall, or more strongly, by vertical elements such as piers or
pilasters. The verticality of the middle section is balanced by the horizontal projections
such as cornices and string courses of the top.
The designs of the facades were underpinned to a degree by the geometry of the Palladian
/ Georgian early 19th century system of proportioning, which determined both the widths
and heights of a window and the horizontal and vertical distances between windows.
The main facades of these buildings were usually of brickwork construction. Commonly the
upper floors were of load-bearing brickwork supported at about first floor level by steel
beams. This allowed the shop fronts at ground level to the contained in larger openings
than would be the case if the walls were entirely of load bearing construction.
The walls of the minor facades were, almost without exception, of load bearing face brick
construction. Typically, the window openings were about a metre wide containing timber
framed double hung sash windows.
Ground floor shops have a ceiling height of around 4 metres. Original shopfronts provide
views into the building to give interest to passers-by and make the building’s function and
retail offer apparent. Original shopfronts consist of a large area of fixed glazing and a
recessed front door. The shopfronts fill an area from around 300-600mm above footpath
level to at least the soffit of the awning with many also exhibiting highlight windows above
the awning. Typically, the mullions and transoms of the shop fronts are thin sections to
maximise the amount of clear glazing and areas above transoms are glazed.
Except for church buildings and the Fremantle Town Hall, all buildings have verandahs or
awning canopies that span the full depth of the footpath and are consistent in height
creating a continuous shelter for pedestrians.
33/33