Local Planning
Policy 2.8
Fences
fremantle.wa.gov.au

Fences
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. This policy may be cited as
Local Planning Policy 2.8 – Fences (LPP 2.8).
Introduction
The purpose of this policy is to augment the Residential Design Codes (R-Codes) for
residential fencing to provide local guidance and dividing fence criteria and provide
development standards for fencing to non-residential properties.
Objectives
The objectives of this policy are:
• to ensure street fences maintain or enhance the character of the prevailing
streetscape and the area while providing safety to road and footpath users;
• to ensure boundary fences have minimal adverse impacts to adjoining properties
with particular emphasis on solar access, visual privacy, building bulk, and views.
Application of this policy
This general Policy applies to all residential development assessed under Volume 1 of the
Residential Design Codes (R-Codes) except where provisions are contained within a Local
Planning Policy, Local Development Plan or Structure Plan pertaining to a more localised
area. In the event that there is a conflict between this general Policy and a provision
contained within another planning instrument dealing with a specific area, the provision
within the specific instrument shall prevail to the extent of any inconsistencies.
For heritage-protected places, in the event that there is a conflict between this Policy and
Local Planning Policy 3.6 Heritage-protected Places Built Form and Land Use (LPP 3.6), the
criteria in LPP 3.6 will prevail.
The deemed-to-comply criteria in this Policy replace the specified deemed-to-comply clauses
of the R-Codes. Where a R-Codes clause or sub-clause is not referred to in this Policy, that
clause remains as per the R-Codes. Where any development does not meet the Policy
criteria, it is to be assessed against the Design Principles of the R-Codes and this Policy (as
relevant), and the objectives of this Policy. Other exemptions from planning approval may
be found in LPP 1.7: Development Exempt from Planning Approval.
Note that a building permit may still be required.
1/8

Policy statement
PART 1 – ALL FENCING
All Development
1. All Fences and Gates
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
N/A
Local Housing Objectives (Design Principles)
Fences to be designed so that they do not present a safety hazard to users of adjoining
properties, particularly residential properties.
Deemed-to-comply
1.1
Fences are not electric, barbed wire, razor wire or similar.
2/8

PART 2 – RESIDENTIAL FENCING
This part covers development assessed under Volume 1 the Residential Design Codes.
Note that in addition to the modified criteria below, all fences abutting vehicle accessways
must also meet the deemed-to-comply criteria of cl. 5.2.5: Sightlines of the R-Codes,
requiring a 1.5m truncation area be provided clear of obstructions greater than 0.75m
high (refer figure below). Additionally, cl. 5.3.5: Vehicular access of the R-Codes has been
modified by Local Planning Policy 2.9: Residential Streetscapes to limit driveway width at
the boundary to maximum 4.5m.
R-Codes Volume 1, Parts B & C
2. Part B, cl. 5.2.4 - Primary street walls and fences
Part C, cl. 3.6 - Streetscape
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
Volume 1, Part B, cl. 5.2.4 (C4.1), (C4.2)
Volume 1, Part C, cl 3.6 (C3.6.8)
Local Housing Objectives (Design Principles)
2.1 In addition to the existing design principles, the local government shall have regard
to maintaining sufficient street surveillance from the property as well as the following
matters:
a) Whether the proposed fence height and permeability is consistent with the
established pattern of fences within the streetscape;
b) Whether minor variations are made necessary by virtue of the sloping topography
of the site; and/or
3/8

c) Whether it is necessary to provide privacy screening where there is no alternative
outdoor living area to the primary street setback.
Deemed-to-comply (Part B)
C4.1
When provided, fences or walls within the primary street setback area are to be:
i. a maximum height of 1.8m; and
ii. visually permeable above 1.2m (refer Figure 12 of the R-Codes);
measured from natural ground level on the primary street side of the fence or wall.
C4.2
Solid pillars that form part of front fences not more than 2.0m above natural ground
level provided the horizontal dimension of the pillars is not greater than 450mm by
450mm and pillars are separated by visually permeable fencing in line with C4.1 (refer
Figure 12 of the R-Codes).
C4.3
Clauses C4.1 and C4.2 above do not apply to primary street fences along Douglas Street
in Fremantle. Fences on Douglas Street are to have a maximum height of 1.1m
measured from natural ground level on the primary street side of the fence or wall.
Deemed-to-comply (Part C)
C3.6.8
Solid pillars that form part of front fences or walls are not more than 2.0m above natural
ground level, provided the horizontal dimension of the pillars is not greater than 450mm
by 450mm and pillars are separated by visually permeable fencing in line with C3.6.7
(Refer Figure 3.6c of Vol. 1 of the R-Codes).
WAPC Approval Required? Date Approved By WAPC
No N/A
3. Secondary street fencing
Part B – New
Part C, cl. 3.6 - Streetscape
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
Part B – New
Part C, cl. 3.6 (3.6.9)
Local Housing Objectives (Design Principles)
3.1 In addition to the existing design principles of clause 3.6 of Part C of the R-Codes,
the local government shall have regard to the following matters:
4/8

a) Whether the proposed fence height and permeability is consistent with the
established pattern of fences within the streetscape;
b) Whether minor variations are made necessary by virtue of the sloping topography
of the site; and/or
c) Whether it is necessary to provide privacy screening where there is no alternative
outdoor living area.
Deemed-to-comply (Part B)
C3.1 (New)
Street fences or walls within a secondary street setback area and outside of a primary
street setback area are solid to a maximum height of 1.8 metres in height measured
from the natural ground level on the secondary street side of the fence or wall.
Deemed-to-comply (Part C)
C3.6.9
For sites on street corners, street fences or walls within the secondary street setback
area are to be designed in accordance with C3.6.7 and C3.6.8 for a minimum 50 per cent
of the street boundary behind the primary street setback (refer Figure 3.6d of the R-
Codes) and with all remaining fencing to a maximum 2.0m in height measured from the
natural ground level on the secondary street side of the fence or wall.
WAPC Approval Required? Date Approved By WAPC
No N/A
4. Boundary fences and screening materials
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
N/A
Local Housing Objectives (Design Principles)
4.1 Boundary fences and screening materials are to have no significant adverse impacts
on the amenity of neighbouring properties, particularly in relation to building bulk, loss of
views, visual privacy, and solar access.
Deemed-to-comply (Parts B & C)
4.1.1
Boundary fences outside of the primary or secondary street setback areas no greater
than 1.8m in height above natural ground level as measured from the highest natural
ground level either side of the boundary fence, and with attached screening material no
more than an additional 500m high.
WAPC Approval Required? Date Approved By WAPC
No N/A
5/8

PART 3 – NON-RESIDENTIAL FENCING
This part covers development that is not assessed under the Residential Design Codes.
5. Non-residential land use
Objectives
• To maintain the amenity of adjoining lots;
• To ensure the style and height of fencing is consistent with the established
pattern of fences within the streetscape;
• To provide safety to vehicles and pedestrians; and
• To provide security to a non-residential property.
Policy Provisions
Where development meets the Policy Provisions below, it is considered to be deemed-to-
comply and does not require a planning approval but may still require a building permit.
Where development does not meet the Policy Provisions, it is assessed against the above
objectives and the objectives of this Policy.
Design Elements Policy Provisions
5.1 Street walls and fences 5.1.1 Primary and secondary street walls and fences for
non-residential properties meet all of the R-Codes
Volume 1, Part B deemed-to-comply criteria as
modified in this Policy.
5.1.2 Street fences are not chain link, mesh, electric, nor
have razor wire, barbed wire, or the like.
5.2 Sightlines at vehicle 5.2.1 Where a fence abuts a vehicle access point and is
access points not of visually permeable construction, sight lines
are provided in accordance with the relevant
Australian Standard AS2890.2 (as amended).
5.3 Boundary fences 5.3.1 Boundary fences outside of the primary and
secondary street setback areas are a maximum of
2.0 metres in height where abutting ground floor
non-residential development, and 1.8 metres in
height where abutting ground floor residential
development or residential zoning.
6/8

Definitions and terms
Heritage-protected place is as defined in Schedule 2 Regulation 1A of the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. For ease of reference: the
definition includes state registered places, locally registered places, places the subject of a
heritage order or heritage agreement, and all properties within a heritage area, including
non-contributory properties.
Prevailing Streetscape means the characteristics (front walls and fencing) of the 3
properties, where appropriate, adjoining either side of the subject site, fronting the same
street and in the same street block.
In the case of a corner lot where the dwelling is orientated to the splay, the characteristics
of the adjoining three properties, where appropriate, facing both streets shall be considered.
Greater weight may be given to the characteristics of the two immediately adjoining
properties on either side of the subject site fronting the same street(s).
For the purpose of this definition, properties separated by a street shall not be considered
‘adjoining’.
Primary street means:
• For residential development, as per the R-Codes; and
• For non-residential development, unless otherwise designated by the local
government, the sole or principal public road that provides access to the major entry
(front door) to the building.
Secondary street means:
• For residential development, as per the R-Codes; and
• For non-residential development, in the case of a site that has access from more
than one public road, a road that is not the primary street.
Subject site means the site or lot on which the development is proposed.
7/8

Local Planning Policy – Document Control
Responsible Officer Previous Policy Title Next Review Date
Manager City Planning N/A (four years)
Version Decision to Adopt/Amend Brief Details of Modifications
1 22 October 2008 - OCM - PSC0809- Adoption
288
2 24 April 2012 - OCM - PSC1204-55 Consolidate and clarify elements
3 23 March 2022 – OCM - PC2203-11 Introduce exemptions and heritage area fences
4 11 March 2026 – OCM – C2603-7
Public Consultation Yes/No
WAPC Approval Required? No Date approved by WAPC N/A
8/8