CITY OF FREMANTLE
LOCAL PLANNING POLICY LPP3.21
WEST END HERITAGE AREA
ADOPTION DATE: 25 November 2020
AUTHORITY: LOCAL PLANNING SCHEME NO. 4 and PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT (LOCAL PLANNING SCHEMES) REGULATIONS
2015
INTRODUCTION
The heritage values attached to Fremantle’s West End are complex and many layered.
They are reflected, and therefore best understood, in the context of the intactness of its
period buildings and the resultant streetscapes of the area. However, they are also
present in its planning and urban design, and how all the different elements of ‘place’ work
together to create something unique. The West End is special and should be understood,
protected and celebrated accordingly. Its exceptional heritage significance was
recognised through its state heritage registration in 2017.
The West End is part of the original Fremantle town centre, as laid out in 1829. High
Street forms its central spine with cross streets connecting the river and harbour to the
north with the Esplanade and ocean (and original settlement long jetty) to the south. The
town’s grid-based planning deviates in several locations to reflect the curved lines of the
river and original shoreline.
Fig. 1 West End in 1833 townsite plan (left) and as it developed (right),both illustrating original shoreline
Whilst relatively little surface evidence remains of the West End’s pre-European past, its
early colonial heritage is represented in the Commissariat Stores and the cottages in
Collie Street and Nairn Street, and in the early town plan layout. There is representation
of the town’s second period of development (1850-1868) when the Convict Establishment
was introduced however the character of the area is most strongly influenced by the
building boom which accompanied the Gold Rush (circa1890-1910). The development of
that period was not purely utilitarian or profit based, but instead there was an clear desire
to make a statement that included quality; it displayed an identifiable mix of business

West End Heritage Area Policy
confidence and civic pride, and conveyed the impression that the buildings were designed
and constructed with flair, by people for people to have a quality of ‘rightness’ that people
continue to find attractive.
1850-1868 1890-1910 1914-1939 1960s
Pre-European 1829 Settlement Convict WWI, Interwar & Containerisation
Establishment Gold Rush WWII & economic shift
Fig. 2 Summary of historic periods of development/ timeline
Maintaining the utility and life of the West End, and conservation of its cultural significance
requires a sensitive and integrated response across many disciplines. Conservation deals
with actions or processes that are aimed at safeguarding the character-defining elements
of a cultural resource so as to retain heritage value and extend its physical life, not the
preclusion of any change: Rather than being seen as a constraint on development, the
West End’s heritage buildings and inherited urban form are recognized as irreplaceable
resources which provide the context, inspiration and a long-term perspective for decisions
regarding the appropriateness of new development.
This policy underpins a strategy for the conservation and ongoing evolution of the West
End as a vibrant urban centre. It does not consider conservation to be a stand-alone
requirement, satisfied by stand-alone provisions, but rather as an essential component of
a planning system that actively guides development to sustainable solutions based on an
understanding of what constitutes the West End’s cultural heritage significance and
distinctiveness.
PURPOSE AND APPROACH
The purpose of this policy is to:
 Define the statement of heritage significance for the West End Heritage Area;
 Guide the formulation of new development proposals; and
 Specify design considerations and criteria against which development proposals
within the West End Heritage Area will be assessed.
It seeks to recognise both the special attributes of the West End which need protection
whilst enabling the continued use and enjoyment of the place by accommodating adaptive
reuse, extension and new development which is sensitive to its context and enhances the
whole as a living place. The policy takes a design-based approach and seeks integrated
responses to multiple design themes. It is broken down into individual elements but
recognises that these interrelate. It also acknowledges that there is local variation and
deviation in some areas, requiring a nuanced and highly contextual response to each site.
Design guidance and illustrations are provided to assist in understanding and interpretation.
This document has received endorsement from the Heritage Council of Western Australia.
STATUTORY BACKGROUND
The Schedule 2 Deemed Provisions of the Planning and Development (Local Planning
Schemes) Regulations 2015 are to be read as though part of the City’s Local Planning
Scheme (LPS4).
Clause 67 of the Deemed Provisions defines matters to be considered by local government
in determining a development application and includes, amongst other things:
 the built heritage conservation of any place that is of cultural heritage significance;
2

West End Heritage Area Policy
 the effect of the proposal on the cultural heritage significance of the area in which
the development is located;
 the compatibility of the development with its setting; and
 any local planning policy for the Scheme area.
Clause 3 of the Deemed Provisions allows local government to prepare a local planning
policy in respect of any matter relating to the planning and development of the Scheme
area.
Clause 9 of the Deemed Provisions allows local government to designate areas needing
special planning control to conserve and enhance the cultural heritage significance and
character of an area to designate it a heritage area and prepare a local planning policy for
that area.
The policy applies as a Local Planning Policy prepared under Clause 3 of the Deemed
Provisions, and meets the requirements of Clause 9. The policy area is also included on
the State Register of Heritage Places and so enjoys separate statutory protection under the
Heritage Act 2018.
PROCESS AND REFERRALS
Applicants are encouraged to engage with the City of Fremantle very early on in the design
process. All substantial applications, such as new buildings or significant additions to
established buildings, will be referred to the Design Advisory Committee for review, in
accordance with Council policy1. Applicants for significant proposals are strongly
encouraged to present a site analysis and concept drawings to the Design Advisory
Committee prior to commencement of detailed design. Design competition may also
provide a constructive approach.
A collaborative process between applicant, designer and City is encouraged to both improve
the quality of design achieved and to streamline the approvals process.
Some applications (such as those involving individually listed buildings) may require referral
by the City to the Heritage Council of WA.
1 Refer Local Planning Policy 1.9 – Design Advisory Committee & Principles of Design
3

West End Heritage Area Policy
Pre-Lodgement
Preliminary discussions with City
Site analysis, concept development
Potential Design Advisory Committee preilminary review
Lodgement & Assessment
Design Advisory Committee
Assessment Advertising Referral to Heritage Council
review
Modifications
Reassessment & re-referral
Referral to Council
Determination
Approval subject to conditions, or refusal
Fig. 3 Summary of assessment process

if required
The City may, in select cases, require an archaeological investigation to be undertaken as
a condition of planning approval, as outlined in Council policy2.
POLICY
Policy Area
The West End Heritage Area to which this policy applies aligns with the ‘West End,
Fremantle (1829 onwards)’ place listed on the State Register of Heritage Places (Place No.
25225). It is bounded by lots fronting Phillimore Street to the north, the rail line parallel to
Little High Street to the west, Marine Terrace and Collie Street to the south and Market
Street to the east.
2 Refer Local Planning Policy 2.7 - Archaeological Investigation as a Condition of Planning
Approval
4

West End Heritage Area Policy
Fig. 4 Policy area
The West End forms part of the Fremantle City Centre and is zoned accordingly under Local
Planning Scheme No. 4.
Statement of Significance3
West End, Fremantle, has cultural heritage significance due to, among other things:
 its rarity in Western Australia as a highly intact port city business district. It retains
a range of buildings dating predominately from the gold rush period (1890s -1900s),
together with some evidence of earlier and later periods, that retain an ongoing
connection with maritime industries;
 its very fine collection of predominantly Federation era buildings in a variety of
classically influenced styles, many of which retain substantial original features,
which together form a cohesive precinct featuring common detailing, scaling, siting,
construction materials and historical functions, and includes many individually
significant buildings;
 its association with Fremantle’s maritime operations from 1829 to the present and,
through the range of premises in the precinct, demonstrates the operations of a port
city including banks, customs, import and export businesses, ship-related trades,
policing, accommodation, unions and migrant services.
The development of the place was in response to the opening of the inner harbour in 1897,
which reoriented the West End towards its northern face, established Fremantle as the
state’s main port and saw an increase in the size and number of shipping companies
operating out of the area, and its twentieth-century economic decline was a result of
modernisation and northern expansion of the port in the 1950s and 1960s. In its built fabric,
the place, particularly the imposing or opulent buildings and streetscapes of the 1890s and
1900s, demonstrates the impact of the Gold Boom period on the state, when money and
3 For further detail and full Heritage Council Statement, referAppendix 1.
5

West End Heritage Area Policy
population flooded into the colony, and Fremantle became a flourishing, prosperous port
town.
The area also incorporates a high number of individually listed places of heritage
significance (shown below) which can be viewed on the City’s website or on the Heritage
Council’s Inherit database.
Fig. 5 Individually heritage-listed properties in policy area (2020)
Policy Objectives
The core objective of this policy is to conserve the heritage attributes of the West End whilst
supporting its ongoing use and vitality. It seeks to enable sustainable development of a
high design quality that complements the West End’s streetscapes and its strong sense of
place, to maintain attractive and comfortable places to live, work and visit.
Specific objectives of this policy are to ensure that:
 Individual places and elements that contribute to the significance of the West End
are recognised and conserved.
 New development, including additions and modifications to existing structures,
minimises conflict with heritage values and contributes to the West End’s identity by
complementing the streetscapes and buildings with a recognisable consistency and
long-term perspective. Specifically, new development should:
o Integrate with the area’s urban setting, established skyline, view corridors,
form, urban scale and grain;
o Respond to the existing streetscape and reflect the proportions, building
format, materials and detailing of buildings within it;
o Relate to the proportions of adjoining buildings;
o Integrate and resolve the different parts of proposed development, including
the spaces between buildings;
o Express the balance, repleteness (‘fullness’) and symmetry of the classically
influenced buildings of the area;
6

West End Heritage Area Policy
o Demonstrate sensitive and perceptive design responses which capture the
essential identity of the original.
 Buildings and spaces remain functional, useful and pleasant.
 The West End continues to contribute to the social, cultural and economic vibrancy
of the Fremantle City Centre and its role as a traditional multi-purpose urban centre.
Policy Structure
The policy provisions are broken down into 7 elements, with each containing:
 A brief introduction and narrative about the element.
 Element objectives, which form the formal criteria against which applications will
be assessed.
 Design guidance, which provides direction on how considerations should be
applied. These are not rigid or ‘deemed to comply’ requirements but outline how
objectives might typically be met or considered in most circumstances.
Elements include:
1. Urban Structure
2. Land Use
3. Massing and Height
4. Roofscape, Views and Skyline
5. Facades
6. Building Type
7. Details and Materials
Whilst each element is separately described, there are strong relationships between each,
and character of the West End can only be fully understood where there these relationships
are appreciated.
Elements
1. Urban Structure
The West End was one of the earliest areas of Fremantle to be established as a
townsite, and its physical layout is distinct from other areas area of Fremantle. It is
urban in nature, accommodating patterns of use and building typology stemming from
its position adjacent to the port and its role as a mixed-use service centre for the
settlement. It contained shops, offices, banks, warehouses, hotels and other services
for travellers and sailors. Today it continues to accommodate shops, offices, and hotels,
as well as residences, but most of the warehouses have been converted for other uses,
and a number of the buildings are now part of the campus of the University of Notre
Dame. It functions as a mixed-use commercial precinct within the larger Fremantle City
Centre.
The area was originally sited on a peninsular between the Indian Ocean and the Swan
River, however, the shore line to the south was reclaimed for the Esplanade Park, while
the mouth of the river to the north was widened and hardened for the creation of the
inner harbour. The original shorelines are today reflected in the angle of Croke Street,
the sweep of Marine Terrace, and the curve of Phillimore Street.
High Street acts as a spine for the precinct, running the length of the old peninsular,
from the Round House through to the Town Hall (outside of the Heritage Area). It
establishes a perpendicular grid that is approximately 25 degrees from north. Streets
are straight, relatively narrow, and those running north-south (i.e. Market, Pakenham,
Henry, Mouat and Cliff) as well as High Street extend through the entire precinct,
terminating at its perimeter. This creates strong visual and physical links to the areas
and landmarks around it, namely the Esplanade Park to the south, the port to the north,
7

West End Heritage Area Policy
the Roundhouse and whalers’ tunnel to the west, and Kings Square to the east.
Conversely the east/west streets of Short, Leake, Bannister and Nairn street terminate
within the precinct, allowing for perpendicular views of the terminating cross street,
Pakenham Street.
Street blocks are fairly compact and fairly consistent. Their size and shape is
emphasised by the form of the buildings in the West End, which line the street edge,
reflecting the perimeter of the block. These blocks are made up of numerous long and
traditionally narrow lots, creating a fine urban
grain that is emphasised by the rhythmic use of
vertical building elements. Public green and
open spaces within the precinct are limited to GRAIN
Pioneer Reserve at the northeast of the precinct, “The pattern and scale of
and the small green space on Phillimore Street street, blocks and plots; and
the rhythm of building
between Mouat and Cliff Street (both of which
frontages along the street as a
have changed over time).
reflection of the lot
subdivision.” (CABE 2003)
The roads in the West End were designed pre-
It provides the two-
car, and so are relatively narrow with short block
dimensional structure on
lengths. The majority of streets are now one way,
which other aspects of the
discouraging through-traffic and heavy vehicles, form of a development
and making navigation difficult for drivers depend.
unfamiliar with the area. Conversely, the area is
highly walkable and an emphasis on pedestrian
amenity has been maintained through urban and
civil design.
Although the West End presents as a largely unified area, it is characterised by six
discernible precincts (refer Illustration 1.3.1), each with a concentration of building
types associated with their location within the historic urban structure:
 Warehouses were originally constructed in the vicinity of the Long Jetty (which
extended south of Bathers Beach), in the area to the south of High Street(‘the
Side Streets’) with more mixed commercial and residential along the
esplanade (‘Esplanade Edge’);
 Shops, banks and hotels were commonly located on High Street, supporting
a wide variety of commercial, retail and social activities that were (and remain)
part of everyday urban life.
 Commercial headquarters (many associated with shipping) clustered north of
High Street during the Gold Rush when Victoria Quay was constructed (‘the
Quay Edge’).
 Smaller residential and commercial buildings remain around Collie Street,
away from High Street and the port (‘the Short Streets’).
Common building types are illustrated inAppendix 2.
The West End’s historic fabric creates variety while maintaining an overall consistency
and coherence that adds value to the city's civic, cultural and social life. Its urban
structure acts as a reminder that it was a prosperous, compact, relatively densely
populated and walkable urban centre.
8

West End Heritage Area Policy
URBAN STRUCTURE
1.1 Element Objectives
1.1.1 Buildings and elements with heritage significance are retained.
1.1.2 New development fits into the established urban structure.
1.1.3 The urban grain of each precinct is maintained.
1.1.4 Urban design prioritises pedestrian amenity whilst accommodating slow
moving traffic and service access.
1.1.5 Existing public open space is preserved and enhanced.
1.2 Design Guidance
1.2.1 Places which are individually listed on the City’s Heritage List or on the
State Register should conserve elements contributing to their individual
significance as well as the collective significance of the buildings of the
West End.
1.2.2 New development should contribute to the harmonious character of the
precinct, acknowledging and taking formal cues from its character and
building typology.
1.2.3 Street block and original lot sizes should be maintained. Amalgamation of
lots will not be supported as this often distorts the subsequent built form.
Where amalgamation has previously occurred, new development should
seek to reflect the original proportions of the lots and rhythm of
development in its planning, layout and detailing.
1.2.4 Highly connected, generously proportioned and uncluttered footpaths
should be maintained.
1.2.5 Vehicle access to a site should be located to minimise impact on
pedestrian movement and urban connectivity.
1.2.6 New development in the Short Streets precinct should acknowledge the
evolving nature of that precinct. The existing heritage-listed pre-Gold
Rush residential buildings should be conserved. New buildings and
additions may, however, include introduction of building height and scale
greater than that of the early residential dwellings where the design:
 respects its context,
 does not dominate retained buildings, and
 serves to illustrate the precinct’s earlier function in contrast to its
contemporary evolution.
1.3 Illustrations
1.3.1 Precincts
9

West End Heritage Area Policy
1.3.2 Illustration of street grid and lot layout (establishing urban grain)
1.3.3 Materialisation of urban grain in buildings
10

West End Heritage Area Policy
2. Land Use
Land use permissibility is governed by the Local Planning Scheme. This locates the
West End within the larger Fremantle City Centre zone which allows for the full range
of shopping, office, administrative, social, recreation, entertainment and community
services as well as residential occupation. This is consistent with Fremantle’s role as
a regional centre. The West End is re-establishing its vibrant urban character and
contributes a diverse range of commercial-mixed uses (including residential and
specialist retail) to the larger City Centre.
Land use has and continues to
influence built form (referAppendix
2) and thus is an important
USE
consideration in design. Active, A heritage place should have a compatible
customer-based land uses (including use, meaning a use which respects the
retail, banks and entertainment uses) cultural significance of a place. Such a use
involves no, or minimal, impact on cultural
are traditionally located on the
significance.
ground floor along High Street, hence
the high degree of pedestrian Judging the best use for a place requires
amenity, visual permeability and balancing the economic viability of
physical access. Commercial and possible uses against the effect of any
changes they entail on the heritage values
residential uses are traditionally
of the building or area in question.
located on upper floors and to the
rear. In principle, the aim should be to identify
the best use for a significant place – its
‘optimum viable use’. It is one that is both
Reintroduction of residential uses into
capable of sustaining the place and
the West End is desirable from many
avoids or minimises harm to its heritage
perspectives including those of values. (Adapted from ICOMOS Burra
heritage, conservation and Charter, 2013)
revitalisation. However, it needs to
acknowledge the mixed-use
environment in which it is located and
where possible design to minimise or
mitigate against incompatible/inconvenient aspects of such an environment.
Whilst the land use composition of the area has changed over time, and will continue
to evolve into the future, new development including changes of land use need to
consider the suitability of the building and precinct in which they propose to locate.
11

West End Heritage Area Policy
LAND USE
2.1 Element Objectives
2.1.1 Land uses contribute to the Local Planning Scheme objectives of
the City Centre zone.
2.1.2 Land use diversity and mixed-use character is maintained
throughout the West End.
2.1.3 Land uses are compatible with the traditional built form of each
precinct or the existing building (if adaptive reuse).
2.1.4 Retail and active pedestrian-focussed uses are concentrated along
High and Market Street ground floor frontage.
2.1.5 Discretionary land uses, as listed in the Zoning Table of the Local
Planning Scheme, are compatible with surrounding uses and
mixed-use environment.
2.2 Design Guidance
2.2.1 Table 2.1 ‘Primary Controls’ of State Planning Policy 7.3 Residential
Design Codes Volume 2 – Apartments is superseded by planning
scheme controls and this policy. No specific residential plot ratio
restriction applies: floorspace is governed by the building envelope
established by lot size, height, setbacks and other elements.
2.2.2 Consideration of the compatibility of use to the built form character of
different precincts is necessary to avoid inappropriate forms of
physical development being proposed to accommodate the
operational needs / expectations of different land uses, examples
being:
 Residential uses and uses requiring a high degree of visual and
acoustic privacy are not appropriate on the High Street ground
floor frontage.
 Small scale, high exposure-requiring tenancies may not be
suited to the warehouse form of development in side streets.
2.2.3 Building design and layout should recognise the mixed-use nature of
the precinct and the likelihood of noise stemming from commercial
and entertainment premises and servicing in the locality.
Incorporation of noise mitigation is encouraged and may be required
for both noise generating and sensitive land uses.
2.2.4 Limited availability of parking and servicing restrictions need to be
acknowledged, planned for and accommodated.
2.2.5 Maintaining the capacity of buildings to adapt over time is
encouraged.
2.2.6 The original use of a building or place should be acknowledged.
Interior elements which reflect the original use of a building e.g.
banking chambers should be retained and conserved. Changes to
interiors will be scrutinised for places which are individually included
on the local or state heritage list.
2.3 Illustrations
2.3.1 Active land uses on High Street & Market Street
12

West End Heritage Area Policy
2.3.2 Larger tenancies in warehouse precinct with less active street interface
2.3.3 Residential use of upper floor
2.3.4 Commercial offices on Phillimore Street
13

West End Heritage Area Policy
3. Massing and Height
The building massing in the West End is generally SCALE
simple, with individual buildings being a three- “The size of a building in
dimensional expression of the rectangular lots that relation to its surroundings, or
the size of parts of a building
combine to form rectangular shaped blocks.
or its details, particularly in
relation to the size of a
Built form is generally hard up against the front person.” (CABE, 2003)
boundary for the full width of the lot, and the full
The impact of a building’s
height of the structure. Buildings on corner lots
scale can depend on from
are often chamfered (angled) and occasionally
where it is viewed. Some
curved at the corner. Collectively, buildings form buildings are too dominant
a consistent urban wall that provides the streets close up but work better when
with a strong sense of enclosure. This is seen from a distance, and vice
versa.
emphasized by the predominant use of the
parapet wall on the street elevation, which creates
Consideration should be
a sharply framed skyline along the length of the given to the scale, massing
street. and height of the proposed
development in relation to
that of the adjoining buildings;
Occasional openings and gaps exist within the
the general pattern of heights
urban wall, either within the façade or between in the area; and views, vistas
buildings; these breaks act to reinforce an and landmarks. How a
appreciation of the building’s depth and simple development will be seen
from around the area must be
massing, and the sense that the open space of
carefully considered to avoid
access-ways or courtyards is defined and
negative impact on the
contained by the built form. surroundings. (Adapted from
ICOMOS Burra Charter,
Many buildings cover the entire block whilst others 2013)
have an area of open space to the rear of or
within the building. Within the depth of the lot, the
form of the building is sometimes complicated by
the addition of secondary structures such as verandah or lean-to, or by the infill of
previously outside spaces, creating an accreted form to the rear that is more varied in
shape, height and roofscape than that adjacent to the street.
Both overall height and internal proportions are
important to the coherence of the built form of the
West End. Buildings are almost all 1-3 storeys,
generally varying according to precinct and
MASSING
original land use, with the majority of structures “The combined effect of the
being 2 storeys. Taller buildings are more arrangement, volume and
common on High Street. shape of a building or group of
buildings. This is also called
‘bulk’.”(CABE, 2003)
Buildings have generous floor to ceiling heights,
particularly on the ground floor. These heights (of
around 4.5m) are fairly consistent throughout the
buildings of the West End and are often reflected
in the façade of the building. This creates a vertical module, and therefore a
consistency between buildings irrespective of the changing number of storeys,
creating a sense of coherence when multiple buildings are viewed from the street.
Building height controls are outlined in the planning scheme and specify a maximum
external wall height of 11m (and 3 storeys) which may be increased to 14m (and 4
storeys) where:
 The proposal is consistent with the predominant height patterns of adjoining
properties and the locality generally,
 The proposal would not be detrimental to the amenity of the adjoining
properties or the locality,
14

West End Heritage Area Policy
 The proposal would be consistent with the conservation objectives of the site,
and the locality generally, and
 The proposal is consistent with any applicable policies (including this).
Variations to building heights will only be supported where consistent with these
objectives and necessary to achieve conservation objectives (such as maintenance of
consistent floor height modules).
MASSING AND HEIGHT
3.1Element Objectives
3.1.1 Developments maintain simple, rectilinear form and relationship to the
street.
3.1.2 Developments encourage a sense of mass and depth behind the façade
(note Figure 3.3.2 below and refer to Part 5 – Facades).
3.1.3 Buildings maintain the continuous urban edge to the street and reinforce
the sense of enclosure.
3.1.4 Development reflects the building height and proportions characteristic
of the West End.
3.2Design Guidance
3.2.1 Development on vacant land should maintain continuous street-based
perimeter form, with nil setbacks at the street edge, and buildings
orienting to, opening into and providing their primary address to the
street.
3.2.2 Upper storey additions to existing buildings (regardless of whether or not
the height of the building including the addition exceeds 11m above
ground level) should be designed to be read as part of a coherent whole
building, and sit comfortably with both the original building and the
streetscape. Setback out of line of sight from ground level in the
adjoining street(s) may provide the most appropriate design response in
some situations and may be required, but will not be mandatory in all
cases4.
3.2.3 Any parking provided on site is to be sleeved. Vehicle access is to be
restricted to traditional cart entrances or, for new development in the
warehouse precinct, minimised or screened to reflect this traditional
form, width and scale. No vehicle access is permitted to High Street.
3.2.4 New development should tie into or reflect the existing floorplates of
traditional buildings. This includes provision of ground floor floor-to-
ceiling heights of 4.5m.
3.2.5 Building height proposed above 11m or 3 storeys will only be considered
where consistent with the criteria specified in the planning scheme and
this policy, and demonstrate how the proportions of the building relate
to the adjoining buildings and streetscape, as well as how the overall
height sits harmoniously within its precinct context.
4 Except where a non-variable requirement of the Local Planning Scheme.
15

West End Heritage Area Policy
3.3 Illustrations
3.3.1 Massing diagram - new development on a vacant site achieves a nil
setback to the street and side boundaries, respecting surrounding
context
3.3.2 Massing and depth – simple building envelope, however finer detailing
adds character to the façade (also note traditional cartway, and half-floor
basement)
16

West End Heritage Area Policy
3.3.3 Example of how upper addition reads coherently with the original building
where this has not been required to be setback (international example).
(Note weight at top)
3.3.4 Front and side view of upper floor addition to an existing building
demonstrating a setback out of line-of-sight from the primary street
3.3.5 Height to proportions (Note how the central building’s height is similar to that of the
adjacent two storey building but the proportions are inconsistent with both adjacent
buildings and contribute to the disruption of the streetscape)
17

West End Heritage Area Policy
4. Roofscape, Views and Skyline
While the roofscape is largely concealed from street view within the West End, the front
parapet and therefore skyline is a key feature of the streetscape. This is due to the
relative consistency of the heights of the buildings, their uniform zero setback and
narrowness of the street, which encourages an oblique view encompassing multiple
buildings at once.
The topography of Fremantle allows views into and over the precinct as well as within
it, with notable views available from Monument Hill and Arthur Head. The massing and
height of buildings influence the impact of development on views, vistas and skylines.
In any new design it is important to establish how and from where the proposed
development will be seen and thus how well it will integrate into its visual context. Side
and rear roofs behind the front parapet are also evident in oblique, and secondary views.
Landmark buildings contain features that visually distinguish them from their
surroundings and can act as symbols or nodes, improving legibility of the urban layout,
and providing visual guidance and direction from the street. They only work when they
are the exception to the rule of their surroundings, and when their distinguishing features
reflect the specific use, position, or significance of the landmark building. As such they
must relate and give meaning to the broader urban structure, rather than be stand-alone
icons, or statements for their own sake. The West End has a number of existing
landmarks, primarily located on the corners of High Street or Phillimore Street (the
higher order streets), and primarily constructed as hotels. These structures used
features such as raised or domed roofs, material contrast and increased detailing as
distinguishing features rather than increased height or intrusion into the street.
ROOFSCAPE, VIEWS AND SKYLINE
4.1 Element Objectives
4.1.1 Buildings maintain the continuous urban edge to the street and the
frame of the skyline.
4.1.2 Existing vistas, views and skyline are retained or enhanced.
4.1.3 The general roofscape and form of the precinct are maintained.
4.2 Design Guidance
4.2.1 New development should fit in with the existing skyline and scale of
development.
4.2.2 New development should utilise flat, low pitched or saw-line roof-form
hidden from the street behind a parapet. Roof forms should be simple in
design, subservient to the built form and be concealed behind the street-
facing parapet.
4.2.3 Mansard roof forms are inconsistent with the character of development
in the area and its traditional roof forms and will not be supported.
4.2.4 Any substantial plant and equipment should be integrated into the roof
void rather than imposed on top.
4.2.5 Landmark elements will only be considered on corner buildings at the
higher order gateways (based on its original urban structure) and should
reflect traditional architectural techniques rather than additional height
to define their role. No opportunities for new landmark buildings have
been identified in the West End.
4.2.6 Acceptable roofing materials as per Section 7 Details and Materials.
18

West End Heritage Area Policy
4.3 Illustrations
4.3.1 Skyline (note how the roof forms are not visible from the street, hidden behind
prominent street-fronting parapet walls)
4.3.2 Roofscape – low-pitched roofs dominate the roofscape of the West
End, predominantly in a greyscale colour scheme.
4.3.3 Significant view down High Street
19

West End Heritage Area Policy
5. Facades
The design of building facades in the West End are typically underpinned by the
classically influenced system of proportioning as well as their intended function (see
Appendix 2 Building Types). The classically influenced system of proportioning is
characterised by:
— symmetry
— the progression and hierarchy of elements
— moderation
— the functional and aesthetic characteristics of a building and their relationship at
every scale.
In the West End, facades do not commonly tend to be (completely) symmetrically
composed, but exhibit the other principles of classical order. Facades are composed to
achieve a balance between vertical elements (such as the pilasters), and horizontal
elements (such as projecting cornices and entablatures). Front facades were often
enriched with stucco mouldings and tend to be strongly modulated using architectural
elements and detailing (see Details and Materials).
Generally corner buildings in the West End have two primary street frontages which
were treated the same level, although some treat the smaller street as a secondary
façade with a reduced level of detail. Only side and rear facades were treated as a
purely utilitarian composition.
The use of classical proportions throughout the West End means that buildings with the
same number of storeys usually have similar floor-to-floor heights, resulting in the
buildings being of approximately the same overall height. It also means that horizontal
elements that were linked to the floor and ceiling levels, such as sills, cornices,
entablatures, verandahs and awnings, are roughly aligned; as a result, they contribute
greatly to the streetscape’s strong sense of unity, particularly when the length of the
street is viewed obliquely, as is usually the case. There are exceptions to the alignment
of façade elements in the existing fabric of the West End (for example in the Warehouse
Precinct where half floor basements were sometimes included), however new
development should comply with this principle to maintain character and reference the
alignment of adjoining horizontal elements. Even when buildings have different floor
heights, such as when one has a half basement, the use of the classical system of
proportioning means that some horizontal elements align.
Buildings throughout the West End are primarily of a human scale, irrespective of their
building type. The term ‘human scale’ focuses on how people interact with buildings
and is based on physical dimensions of elements as well as sensory perception of a
place and how they relate to the human body.
20

West End Heritage Area Policy
FACADES
5.1 Element Objectives
5.1.1 New development reflects the classical proportions and character of
adjacent building and the streetscape whilst remaining discernible as
contemporary. The contrast should be clear but subtle.
5.2 Design Guidance
5.2.1 Corner buildings should have two primary street frontages which are
treated the same or with only a slightly reduced level on detail on the
secondary (smaller street) facade.
5.2.2 Consideration should be given to the proportions of the building and how
they relate to each other as well as surrounding buildings. A degree of
adherence to the geometry of classically influenced proportioning can
help to harmonise the building with its neighbours.
5.2.3 Horizontal elements of new development, inclusive of windows, parapets,
and detailing, should align (with a small degree of variation) with horizontal
elements of adjacent buildings to enhance the relationship between
buildings and traditional proportioning.
5.2.4 For new buildings or additions, aligning floor levels with adjacent buildings
is encouraged where possible to assist with horizontal expression.
Significant changes to internal floor levels in existing buildings will not be
supported as this affects articulation of horizontal proportions and often
compromises internal space.
5.2.5 Voids and openings should:
 contribute to the rhythm of the streetscape and be considered
obliquely as well as directly, along with projections and façade form;
 be aligned both vertically and horizontally;
 articulate depth:
 be reflective of traditional techniques and reflect a hierarchical
progression of elements.
 Doors and windows should have a vertical emphasis, particularly in
upper floors.
5.2.6 Additional height should be articulated and provide a ‘top’, or entablature,
to the building, referencing classical proportioning and the existing façade
aesthetic of the West End.
5.2.7 Additions that extend above an existing parapet, where these are
permitted on heritage grounds, should respond to the proportions of the
façade and be articulated to reflect classical proportioning hierarchy and
scale.
5.2.8 Imitation should be avoided; however, a subtle (as opposed to stark)
difference between new and existing is more likely to retain characteristic
coherence of the streetscapes than contrasting modern re-interpretation.
Design responses may include contemporary expression, however this
must be carefully articulated and justified and it will be subject to
thorough design review. Reconstruction may be appropriate in some
cases where evidence is available and sufficient to accurately restore
what was previously there.
Note: Reference to adjoining building provides important context and streetscape
continuity however in the few instances where the adjoining building is a modern and
intrusive element, this principle does not apply.
21

West End Heritage Area Policy
5.3 Illustrations
5.3.1 Analysis of Classical proportions of historic building using the Golden
Mean/ Spiral (left) and using the diameter of a classical column to
proportion the height and width of all other façade elements (right).
Fibonacci’s ‘Golden sprial’ Image by Yurong Tan – UWA design studio
as reproduced on laurelberninteriors.com
5.3.2 Inappropriate proportions clash with the established Classically
proportioned character of the West End
5.3.3 Façade Rhythm (note module widths, general alignment of windows and horizontal
elements)
22

West End Heritage Area Policy
6. Building Types
In the West End, the functional and aesthetic characteristics of a building are closely
related to one another. The distinctive character of many heritage buildings comes
from their use, their role in the community, the facilities they provide and the activity
they generate. The importance of the contribution that the appropriate use a building
can play in reinforcing the character of the precinct should not be overlooked.
Understanding a building’s original intended function offers opportunities for new
development to utilise existing elements and enhance cultural value.
The range of building types in the West End is reflective of the place’s history as a port
town, and demonstrates the influence of the Gold Rush on progression of industry.
Preserving the legibility of building types in the West End is essential to the successful
conservation of the place. The six broad categories of building types in the West End,
along with the precinct where they are most prevalent, are summarised below:
Building Type PrecinctMost Commonly Found In
Retail/Mixed Use High Street
Commercial The Quay Edge
Hotels High Street
Warehouses The Side Streets
Pre-Gold Rush Residential The Short Streets
Retail/Mixed Use buildings were developed to meet the rapid growth created by the
1890’s Gold Rush and a wide range of interconnected uses centred around the port.
This type of building continued to be constructed during the inter-war era with the only
major difference being the architectural treatment of the front façade and the
increased height. Large shopfronts on the ground floor were sheltered by a verandah
to encourage window shopping. Offices or residences were located above behind a
classically proportioned façade with either a separate entrance or entrance through
the shop.
Commercial buildings such as banks and shipping offices were generally designed to
express solidarity and permanence, and composed in the Federation Academic
Classical style, rather than the more exuberant and inventive Classical Freestyle
favoured for retail buildings and hotels. The ground floor was often slightly elevated
with entrance steps and was not sheltered with a verandah. Sometimes there were
recessed porticos on the upper floor.
Hotels of the West End, and their prevalence as landmarks, are telling of the port’s
function, with workers and visitors needing conveniently located accommodation.
Hotels usually had verandahs and were often located on corner sites and were
embellished with a corner feature such as a turret.
Warehouses in the West End were constructed during an extended period when the
processing, storage and distribution of export and import commodities took place in
the vicinity of the harbour. Commercial offices were located on the street with large
open warehouse storage spaces behind accessed by a cartway. These buildings did
not have verandahs.
Pre-Gold Rush residential buildings are usually single storey residential buildings,
often with a low boundary wall to the front set on the boundary. The boundary wall
encloses a front verandah.
The combination of building types tell the story of the West End and give a picture of
how the port city operated.
23

West End Heritage Area Policy
BUILDING TYPES
6.1 Element Objectives
6.1.1 New development (including additions) does not diminish the legibility of
original building type.
6.1.2 New development is compatible with the precinct, sits comfortably
alongside existing buildings, and assists in interpreting the history of the
area.
6.2 Design Guidance
6.2.1 New development should be consistent with the primary building type of
its precinct.
6.2.2 Proposals that bring the upper level of Retail Mixed Use buildings into use
are encouraged and new independent access arrangements may be
supported provided they do not undermine the recognised heritage value
of the place.
6.2.3 Re-instating verandahs is encouraged where evidence is available to
indicate a verandah was once present. Reinstatements should use
photographic records to ensure they are reasonably accurate. Timber
posts, although traditional, are not recommended as they are prone to
deterioration. Enclosure of verandahs is not supported.
6.2.4 Traditional shopfronts along Market Street and High Street are to be
retained and where possible enhanced to maintain the character of the
High Streets sub-area. Both the Gold Rush period timber frames and the
interwar period, art deco influenced metal frames are significant.
Traditionally windows were fixed pane; partial operability of windows will
only be considered where frames are invisible. The removal of transoms
from shopfronts will not be supported. Detailing of new windows should
best match the colour and finish, width and opening size of traditional
window types located in the West End.
6.2.5 For warehouse buildings, existing cartways should be used as vehicle
access when this is required into the site
6.3 Illustrations
6.3.1 Detail of shopfronts to Retail/ Mixed Use buildings (interwar and
Goldrush)
24

West End Heritage Area Policy
6.3.2 Multi-level verandahs typical on hotels. Corner locations and corner
features enhance the landmark quality of these buildings.
25

West End Heritage Area Policy
7. Details and Materials
The West End's buildings and resultant streetscapes are rich in detail. Paying attention
to detail, as well as to matters such as form and mass, is therefore important in
determining how successfully individual buildings combine with their surroundings.
Architectural detail is also an integral part of the functional design of a building and
should not be confused with purely decorative ornamentation.
Buildings within the West End are predominantly in the Classical Freestyle and their
facades reflect the architectural detailing of this style, as well as its proportional rules.
The requirement for new development to be appropriate to its immediate setting should
include creating buildings of an appearance that references the classical influences of
the existing buildings of the precinct. This design approach needs great care to be
applied to ensuring that well-proportioned, honest buildings and spaces are created,
rather than a poor imitation of the style.
The external walls of buildings within the West End define the edge of the public
realm, and as such the quality and robustness of their material is important.
Traditionally, external walls were composed of locally derived materials such as red
brick and limestone. While some structures (most commonly shops) make use of a
hybrid structural system employing iron columns and beams, almost all give the
appearance of traditional load bearing construction with a sense of quality, solidity and
endurance. Use of contrasting materials sometimes complemented detailing to form
an architectural element and emphasise proportion, rhythm and patterning. There is
often a material distinction between the front, side and rear facades of a building.
Some early and more utilitarian structures such as warehouses were constructed
largely from limestone, either rendered or with brick quoining around openings. The
street facades of offices, shopfronts and hotels were more commonly constructed from
tuck-pointed face brickwork, which was left unpainted. This was often partially
rendered in a contrasting grey-coloured, hydraulic lime render to delineate between
different aspects of the building and to create harmonious proportions, patterning and
rhythms in conjunction with other architectural features such as openings and stucco
moulded pilasters, cornices and the like. At other times the façade was fully rendered
using linework to give the appearance of ashlar stonework and varying textures to
delineate different elements or levels of the building. In contrast with that of the street,
the side and rear facades were more utilitarian, being either plain face brickwork or
flush pointed limestone, with a greater proportion of mortar than stone. Combined with
deep reveals around openings, these various materials give a sense of depth and
solidity to the façade.
Timber joinery was employed for smaller openings, and rear and secondary structures
such as verandahs. Steel support was used for larger openings such as those in shop
fronts. Cast iron, and decorative iron lace was used for street verandahs, balustrading
and cartway gates.
26

West End Heritage Area Policy
DETAILS AND MATERIALS
7.1 Element Objectives
7.1.1 Buildings and their facades respond to the architectural detailing of the
Classical Freestyle, as well as its proportional rules.
7.1.2 Materials used in new development are consistent with or
complimentary to the original fabric of the West End.
7.1.3 New development visible from the street maintains the natural
characteristics of traditional materials and an ability to endure age and
weather.
7.2 Design Guidance
7.2.1 Materials and colour can assist in delineating different areas and levels
and in reinforcing the proportions of the building. Materials and colour
selected in new development should be complimentary to historic
fabric to integrate new development successfully into the West End.
7.2.2 Traditional materials are preferred however new forms can be
considered acceptable where they do not damage existing traditional
materials or detract from character. Maintenance should be
considered when materials are selected.
7.2.3 Traditional materials often had texture or varied materials were used
next to each other. Texture is not often present in contemporary
materials: application of texture should be considered in new
development. Texture can be provided by the natural grain of stone,
the coursing and variety of masonry units or tiling or raised rendered
decorative motifs.
7.2.4 Existing timberwork or replacement timberwork should be painted to
protect the timber and to maintain character. Where replacement of
timberwork is required, new timber should be painted to best match the
original colour.
7.2.5 Historic photographs and investigative paint scrapes should be used
to best match original paint colour/tonal variation. Colour should be
selected from traditional colours where the original is unknown.
7.2.6 Removal of acrylic paint from original face brickwork is strongly
encouraged. Testing should be carried out prior to works. Rendering
or painting of existing face brickwork or rendered elements will not be
supported; this traps moisture and salt, and can result in significant
structural damage.
7.2.7 Rendering or painting of limestone will not be supported. Existing
render should be removed where it will not cause damage to the face
of the limestone. Testing should be carried out prior to works.
7.2.8 Acceptable roofing materials include galvanised iron, Zincalume or
Colorbond © in Shale Grey.
7.2.9 Signage should be modest, integrated into the building and readily
removable. Signage on High Street should be integrated into the
awnings. Digital signage is not appropriate.
7.2.10 Groundwater is high in the West End and may increase with sea level
rise. Basements and ground floors should be designed / treated to
minimise risk and may require the input of a structural engineer.
Concrete slabs should not be used as this traps water and often forces
the damp into the more porous walls. Where concrete slabs are
required, separation should be given to allow water in walls to escape.
7.2.11 Detailing (often mistaken for ‘ornamentation’) should assist in practical
functions such as water removal and for load bearing construction.
7.2.12 Curtain walls, applied facades and tinted glass are inappropriate to the
character of the area and will typically not be supported. However,
curtain walls may be justified to articulate junctions between building
elements in limited circumstances.
27

West End Heritage Area Policy
7.3 Illustrations
7.3.1 Functional role of traditional building detail
7.3.2 Simpler but still distinct detailing on warehouses
28

West End Heritage Area Policy
7.3.3 Modern detailing, with lesser depth(Note non-traditional red mortar)
7.3.4 Example of curtain wall connection between buildings
29

West End Heritage Area Policy
7.3.5 Examples of appropriately distinct but subtle contrast between
traditional and contemporary buildings (international example)
7.3.6 Example of damage to brickwork and deteriorating steel from acrylic
paint trapping moisture and salts in the wall.
30

West End Heritage Area Policy
REQUIREMENT CHECKLIST (Element Objectives)
☐Element 1: Urban Structure
o Buildings and elements with heritage significance are retained.
o New development fits into the established urban structure
o The urban grain of each precinct is maintained
o Urban design prioritises pedestrian amenity whilst accommodating slow
moving traffic and service access.
o Existing open space is preserved and enhanced.
☐Element 2: Land Use
o Land use diversity and mixed use character is maintained through the West
End
o Land uses are to be compatible with the traditional built form of each precinct
o Concentration of retail and active pedestrian-focussed uses along the High
Street ground floor frontage.
o Land uses (where the planning scheme allows discretion in this) compatible
with surrounding uses and mixed use environment.
☐Element 3: Massing and Height:
o Developments maintain simple, rectilinear form to the street.
o Developments encourage a sense of mass and depth beyond the façade.
o Buildings maintain the continuous urban wall to the street and reinforce the
sense of enclosure.
o Development reflects the building heightand proportions characteristic of the
West End.
☐Element 4: Roofscape, Views and Skyline
o Buildings maintain the continuous urban wall to the street, and the frame of
the skyline.
o Existing vistas, views and skyline are retained or enhanced.
o The general roofscape and form are maintained.
☐Element 5: Facades
o New development reflects the classical proportions and character of adjacent
building and the streetscape whilst remaining discernible as contemporary.
The contrast should be clear but subtle.
☐Element 6: Building Type
o New development (including additions) do not diminish the legibility of
original building type.
o New development is compatible with the precinct, sit comfortably along side
existing buildings, and assists in interpreting the history of the area.
☐Element 7: Details and Materials
o Buildings and their facades reflect the architectural detailing of the Classical
Freestyle, as well as its proportional rules.
o Materials used in new development are consistent with or complimentary to
the original fabric of the West End.
o New development visible from the street maintains the natural characteristics
of traditional materials and an ability to endure age and weather.
31

West End Heritage Area Policy
Drawings and Documentation (typical):
☐Context analysis
☐Design statement
☐If the site is heritage listed, a heritage assessment
☐Site layout including details of landscaping and materials (separate landscape plan
required if extensive)
☐Floor plans (full set including roof plan)
☐Sections through development
☐Building and Street Elevations
For buildings including new street façade / modifications
☐Mass to void proportions
☐Classical proportion diagram overlaid over single facade
☐Streetscape perspectives
☐Schedule of materials and finishes
Recommended Process:
☐Preliminary consultation with City of Fremantle prior to lodgement
☐Determination of significance of proposal and DAC referral requirements
☐Substantial Proposals: Presentation of site analysis and concept drawings to DAC
☐Following up review if required
☐Option for major proposals: Design Competition
☐Substantial Proposals: Presentation of design drawings to DAC
☐Follow up review if required
☐Lodgement
*Definitions derived from “The Councillors Guide to Urban Design” (CABE, 2003)
32

APPENDIX 1 – FULL STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE (Heritage Council WA)
West End, Fremantle, bounded by Market Street to the east, Collie Street and Marine
Terrace to the south, Little High Street to the west and Phillimore Street to the north, and
including the lots on the northern side of Phillimore Street between Cliff and Henry Streets,
has cultural heritage significance for the following reasons:
i. the place is rare in Western Australia as a highly intact port city business district,
retaining a range of buildings predominantly dating from the gold boom expansion
era (1890s-1900s), along with some evidence of earlier and later periods, that
retains an ongoing connection with maritime industries;
ii. the place is characterised by a very fine collection of predominantly Federation era
buildings in a variety of classically-influenced styles, many of which retain
substantial original features, which together form a cohesive precinct featuring
common detailing, scaling, siting, construction materials and historical functions,
and includes many individually significant buildings;
iii. the place has been associated with Fremantle’s maritime operations from 1829 to
the present and, through the range of premises in the precinct, demonstrates the
operations of a port city including banks, customs, import and export businesses,
ship-related trades, policing, prostitution, accommodation, unions and migrant
services;
iv. the development of the place was in response to the opening of the inner harbour in
1897, which reoriented the West End towards its northern face, established
Fremantle as the State’s main port and saw an increase in the size and number of
shipping companies operating out of the area, and its twentieth-century economic
decline was a result of modernisation and northern expansion of the port in the
1950s and 1960s;
v. in its built fabric, the place, particularly the imposing or opulent buildings and
streetscapes of the 1890s and 1900s, the precinct demonstrates the impact of the
Gold Boom period on the State, when money and population flooded into the
Colony, and Fremantle became a flourishing, prosperous port town;
vi. the place policed, and was partially constructed by convicts and is intrinsically linked
with the nineteenth century convict history of Western Australia;
vii. the port associated with the place was the main arrival point for migrants to Western
Australia from 1829 until the second half of the twentieth century, and the place was
a major part of their first experience of the State;
viii. the place is a landmark area defining the western end of Fremantle, with strong entry
statement buildings at several points, views to and from Fremantle landmarks and,
historically, views from the sea;
ix. the archaeology of the place has a high degree of potential to reveal information
about the history and occupation of the West End from 1829 to the present,
particularly with regard to deposits dating to the pre-Gold Rush era;
x. the place was rejuvenated in the mid-1980s as part of preparations for hosting the
America’s Cup yachting event in 1987, which brought international attention to
Fremantle;
xi. the place is associated with many significant individuals, including government and
private architects, merchants and other business people of the area, union leaders,
former residents and the original surveyor, John Septimus Roe, whose 1830s plans
for the town continue to dictate the precinct’s road layout and lot boundaries; and,

West End Heritage Area Policy
xii. the place is significant to the local community as an historic area that contributes to
the community’s sense of place, as evidenced by the work of the Fremantle Society
since 1972 to protect and restore the precinct, and is representative of the role of
community activism in protecting and restoring many heritage sites in Western
Australia prior to the introduction of heritage legislation in 1990.
2

West End Heritage Area Policy
APPENDIX 2 – BUILDING TYPES5
Retail Mixed Use
Commercial / Office
5 Further examples of traditional West End buildings and an analysis of their attributes can be
found in the Fremantle Local Identity Code.
3

West End Heritage Area Policy
Hotel
Warehouse Mixed Use
4

West End Heritage Area Policy
Pre-Gold Rush Residential
5