Department of Planning,
Lands and Heritage
Position
Statement:
Special Residential Zone
May 2021
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the Department © State of Western Australia website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, Published by the
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result Perth WA 6000 This document is available in alternative
of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect formats on application to the
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred Locked Bag 2506 Communications Branch.
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before Perth WA 6001
applying the information contained in this document to Published May 2021
particular circumstances.

Position Statement:
1
Special Residential Zone
May 2021
1. Policy Intent the zone will be removed from the • State Planning Policy 2.5: Rural
Regulations in the next stage of their planning
This position statement outlines review, scheduled in 2021.
• State Planning Policy 3: Urban
the Western Australian Planning
growth and settlement
Commission’s (WAPC) intent to Special residential development
discontinue the special residential is considered an inefficient use of • State Planning Policy 7.3:
zone in local planning schemes. residential land. It places pressure Residential Design Codes
It also provides general guidance on State and local governments for Volume 1
measures for subdivision, use and services and infrastructure which are
development in existing special difficult to provide because of the • Operational Policy 1.1 Subdivision
residential zones. dispersed pattern of subdivision. of land - general principles
It can also limit opportunities for
• Operational Policy 1.7 General
urban development by fragmenting
road planning
2. Special Residential land, and making land assembly
and the provision of services more • Operational Policy 2.2 Residential
zone in Western
difficult and costly. When it can be subdivision
Australia appropriately justified, low-density
• Operational Policy 2.3 Public
residential development should be
open space in residential areas
Special residential zones were serviced to a similar standard to other
created in local planning schemes to residential development. • Operational Policy 5.1 Regional
allow for lots of a size which offered roads (vehicular access)
a spacious lifestyle at densities
lower than traditional ‘quarter acre’ 3. Application of this
residential lots but higher than those 4. Policy objectives
policy
found in the rural residential zone
(one to four hectares). Typically,
The objectives of this position
This position statement applies to
special residential lots ranged in
statement are to:
land zoned special residential under a
size from 2,000m2 to 10,000m2 (one
hectare). local planning scheme. • phase out the special residential
zone in local planning schemes
This position statement is to be
The Special Residential zone was
considered in association with: • provide general guidance for
removed from Schedule 3 of Planning
subdivision and development of
and Development (Local Planning • State Planning Policy 2.4: Basic
existing special residential zoned
Schemes) Regulations 2015 (the raw materials
land to:
Regulations). The objectives for

Position Statement:
2
Special Residential Zone
May 2021
5.2 Structure plan
– protect the character and d) Important topographical b) Where possible, be
amenity of rural areas adjacent and subdivision or environmental features connected to reticulated
to existing special residential considerations such as a creek, lake or sewerage. Where this is
zones group of trees may be not possible, and land is
Each structure plan is to be viewed required to be protected suitable for on-site effluent
– mitigate potential adverse
and able to be read as a standalone and retained via ceding of disposal, the provisions
effects between rural land
document. It is acceptable to refer to the land to the Crown. of the Government
uses and adjacent special
a preceding higher-level, endorsed Sewerage Policy (2019)
residential zones and e) The special residential
structure plan, such as sub-regional will be applied.
zone should not be
– conserve vegetation and or district structure plans, to avoid
adversely affected by c) Services (e.g. water,
landform through appropriate repetition, as and where appropriate.
activities of adjoining sewerage, power) may
lot sizes. The information to be included
rural land uses and require an integrated
in a structure plan is outlined in
development in the design of service corridors
Schedule 2, Part 4, clause 16 of the
special residential zone aligned with roads to
5. Policy measures deemed provisions of the Planning
should not limit the minimize the clearing of
and Development (Local Planning
continued operation of vegetation.
Schemes) Regulations 2015.
5.1 Phasing out the special existing rural land uses.
d) The WAPC will generally
residential zone Appropriate setback
The following considerations will require the provision
distances may be required
be applied in the assessment of a of underground power
It is the intention that the special between rural land use
structure plan or subdivision of land to lots in the special
residential zone be discontinued as and proposed dwellings
within a special residential zone. residential zone and may
local planning schemes are reviewed on the special residential
consider alternative power
and amended and replaced with lots. This may be achieved
5.2.1 Layout and Lot size supply based upon the
an appropriate zone, which may via lot size, layout and the
advice of the relevant
include residential, with a low- a) Lot sizes to vary between use of building envelopes
licensed service provider.
density residential coding under the 2,000m2 to 10,000m2. or exclusion areas.
Residential Design Codes Volume 1.
b) Reflect the topographical 5.2.3 Roads
5.2.2 Servicing
and environmental
The WAPC will not support scheme a) Roads shall be sealed,
characteristics of the land a) Services of a type
amendments to rezone land to curbed and drained and
and minimize land fill and and standard typical
special residential. As local planning culverts provided where
earthworks. of a residential zone.
schemes are reviewed, land currently required.
Reticulated water will be
zoned special residential will need c) Seek to preserve
required as a condition of
to be identified as an alternative vegetation and
subdivision approval.
zone, such as residential, with an rehabilitate denuded
appropriate code of R2, R2.5 or R5. areas.

Position Statement:
3
Special Residential Zone
May 2021
b) Properties may require for subdivision proposals
suitable uniform fencing in accordance with Better
along boundaries and Urban Water Management
road reserves. (WAPC 2008).
5.2.4 Open Space
6. Definitions
a) Generally, a public open
space contribution is
not requested in special Refer to the Planning and
residential zones due to Development (Local Planning
the larger lot sizes. Schemes) Regulations 2015.
5.2.5 Bushfire
a) Site design should
accord with standards of
State Planning Policy 3.7
Planning in Bushfire Prone
Areas and Guidelines for
Planning in Bushfire Prone
Areas.
5.2.6 Drainage and water
management
a) The retention and
protection of natural storm
water drainage channels
by providing drainage
reservations or easements
for storm water.
b) In situations where there
are significant water
management issues, an
Urban Water Management
Plan should be prepared