Temporary Structures
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP1.14
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 25 October 2019
Policy Objectives
To allow the use of temporary structures for construction and storage purposes where they are
located so to minimise the amenity and safety impacts upon adjoining properties and the
surrounding area.
Policy Scope
This policy refers to the installation of temporary structures for 12 months or less, on both private
property and property under the care and control of the City of Melville.
The policy provisions do not apply for the installation of temporary structures for a period in excess
of a 12 month period. In such cases, proposals will be assessed against the relevant provisions of
LPS6, the R-Codes (where relevant) and Council Policy.
In accordance with Section 6 of the Planning and Development Act 2005, where a public authority
(such as the City of Melville or other agency), installs a temporary structure on land zoned under
LPS6, development approval may not be required.
In accordance with Clause 61(f) of Schedule 2 of the Regulation, the City reserves the right to
waive the requirement for development approval for a temporary structure.
Definitions / Abbreviations Used In Policy
LPS6 Local Planning Scheme No. 6
R-Codes State Planning Policy 7.3 Residential Design Codes Volume 1 and
Residential Design Codes Volume 2 – Apartments
the Regulations Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations
2015
Temporary structures Include sea containers, prefabricated or demountable offices,
portable toilets, skip bins and the like. For guidance in relation to
temporary signs refer to Local Planning Policy 2.2 – Outdoor
advertising and signage.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:45 AM Page 1 of 3
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Policy Statement
On private property
The placement of temporary structures on private property is permitted without the requirement to
obtain development approval where the temporary structure will be:
• In place for no longer than 14 calendar days within a 6 month period;
• Located entirely within the property boundaries; and
• Located so not to obstruct vehicle sight lines.
Where temporary structures are proposed to be installed on private property for longer than 14
calendar days, development approval is required to be obtained prior to installation. Applications
for development approval will be assessed against the criteria set out below.
During construction
The placement of temporary structures on private property during construction to facilitate storage,
sale, administration and construction activities is acceptable where the temporary structure will be:
• In place for no longer than 12 months;
• Located entirely within the property boundaries; and
• Located so not to obstruct vehicle sight lines
Outside of a construction period
The placement of temporary structures on private property where construction works are not
occurring can be necessary for temporary storage purposes. This is acceptable where the
temporary structure is:
• In place for no longer than 12 months;
• Limited to one per property;
• Located so not to obstruct vehicle sight lines;
• Setback from property boundaries in accordance with LPS6, the R-Codes (where relevant) and
Council Policy;
• Effectively screened from view of the street or any adjacent public space; and
• Will not obstruct any on-site car parking bays or vehicular manoeuvring area which are
required to be provided for the approved use(s) of the property.
On property under care and control of City of Melville
Within the road reserve
Development approval is not required however there may be a need to obtain materials on verge
permit from the City’s Building Services. Owners and applicants are encouraged to liaise directly
with Building Services to obtain more information in this respect.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:45 AM Page 2 of 3
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Local Open Space
Development Applications for the placement of temporary structures on reserves for construction
or temporary storage purposes (relating to the development or use of the reserve only) will be
assessed against the following criteria:
• In place for no longer than 12 months;
• Located so not to obstruct vehicle sight lines;
• Located adjacent to existing buildings or vegetation on the reserve which will provide adequate
screening; and
• The applicant provides evidence of public liability insurance to the value of $20 million.
Once the temporary structure is removed, the applicant will be required to reinstate the reserve to
the City’s specifications.
Land Reserved under the MRS
Development approval may be required from the relevant state government agency.
References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No. 6
State Planning Policy 7.3 Residential Design Codes
Volume 1 and Residential Design Codes Volume 2 –
Apartments
LPP1.6 Car Parking and access
LPP2.1 Non-Residential Development
Planning Bulletin 94: Approval Requirements for Public
Works and Development by Public Authorities
Delegated Authority No: DA – 020: Planning and Related Matters
Origin/Authority Item No.
Planning and Development Services Committee 18/02/92
Reviews
Special Planning and Development Committee 27/6/2000 P00/1004
Ordinary Meeting of Council 17/8/2010 P10/3152
Ordinary Meeting of Council 15/04/2014 P14/3482
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/09/2016 P16/3718
Ordinary Meeting of Council 16/04/2019 P19/3808
Administrative Review 6/8/2019
(Council Resolution 18/6/2019)
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:45 AM Page 3 of 3
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.