Telecommunications Facilities and
Communications Equipment
This document outlines the assessment criteria for telecommunications facilities and
communications equipment in the City of Melville.
If you are searching for general information in relation to planning requirements, please refer to the
Planning Services page of our website https://www.melvillecity.com.au/ or alternatively you can
speak to one of our planning officers either on the phone 9364 0666 or in person at 10 Almondbury
Road, Booragoon during business hours, 8.30am – 5.00 pm Monday to Friday.
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP1.7
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 17 March 2026
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development (Local
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (Regulations) and the City of Melville Local Planning Scheme
No. 6 (LPS No. 6). This Local Planning Policy may be cited as Local Planning Policy No. 1.7 –
Telecommunications Facilities and Communications Equipment (LPP 1.7).
Policy Purpose
It is recognised that there is a need for telecommunications and communications infrastructure and
equipment to be located within the City, as such installations contribute to the State and national
network of communications infrastructure, the existence of which supports residents and businesses
of the City in their need to access quality and reliable telecommunications systems and facilities.
Whilst the City recognises the need to respond in a positive and responsible way to applications for
telecommunications development, the adverse impacts that such development proposals can have
must be managed to ensure that the visual character of the City is not undermined. The management
of these potentially adverse impacts is therefore the overriding aim of this Policy.
The Policy should be read in conjunction with the Western Australian Planning Commission (WAPC)
Statement of Planning Policy 5.2 “Telecommunications Infrastructure”, and the “Guidelines for the
Location, Siting and Design of Telecommunications Infrastructure” (March 2004). Collectively, these
three documents provide a comprehensive policy framework against which all applications for
telecommunications development within the City of Melville will be measured and assessed.
Policy Objectives
The objectives of this policy are as follows:
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 8/04/2026 9:37 AM Page 1 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

• To promote the orderly and proper development of land by outlining suitable provisions
relating to the location and design of Telecommunications facilities and Communications
equipment that are not classified within legislation as low-impact facilities;
• To provide development standards to address the visual amenity impacts relating to the
location of Telecommunications Facilities and Communications Equipment; and
• To provide additional development assessment provisions for the assessment of proposals
for the installation of communications equipment to residential properties, as governed by
the provisions of the Residential Design Codes of Western Australia.
• To provide guidance for members of the public and applicants against which applications for
telecommunications and communications development will be assessed by the City of
Melville.
Policy Scope
Under the Telecommunications Act 1997, the installation of low-impact facilities, as defined by the
Telecommunications (Low Impact Facilities) Determination 1997 (and its subsequent amendments)
are exempt from the requirement to obtain planning approval when installed by a Carrier.
The provisions of this policy therefore apply to the installation of telecommunications facilities which
are not exempt under the Telecommunications Act 1997. For exempt facilities, the City will inform
elected members of all notifications from telecommunications providers and request that
telecommunications providers advise affected adjoining and adjacent landowners and occupiers of
the intended facilities where these works will result in an increase in the physical presence of the low
impact facility.
Clauses 5.4.4 (Part B) and 2.5 (Part C) of the Residential Design Codes (R-Codes) Volume 1 provide
assessment criteria with respect to the installation of incidental external fixtures and features,
including communications equipment, on residential properties. Clause 3.2.3a of the R-Codes allows
Councils to modify clauses 5.4.4 (Part B) and 2.5 (Part C). With respect to development proposals
subject to R-Codes Volume 2 – Apartments, the clauses relating to utilities and external fixtures
cannot be modified without WAPC approval, as such these elements are not superseded by this
policy.
Definitions / Abbreviations Used In Policy
Telecommunications infrastructure - includes any part of the infrastructure of a telecommunications
network including any line, equipment, apparatus, tower, antenna, tunnel, duct, hole, pit or other
structure used, or for use in or in connection with, a telecommunications network.
Communications equipment - includes satellite dishes, television antennas, citizen band antennas,
microwave antennas and other equipment and structures used to transmit or receive television and
radio signals.
Regulations Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 8/04/2026 9:37 AM Page 2 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

R-Codes The Residential Design Codes
Policy Statement
Telecommunications Facilities
1 Within the City of Melville, the preferred location for new and/or additional Telecommunications
infrastructure is at existing telecommunications sites, where infrastructure can be added to
existing installations with little or no additional impact.
2 Where co-location is demonstrated not to be possible, new Telecommunications infrastructure
must satisfy the following criteria:
• Be located within the Centre, Mixed Use, Service Commercial, Light Industry, Private clubs
institutions and places of worship and Urban development zones or on land reserved under
the provisions of the City of Melville Local Planning Scheme No 6, or Parks and Recreation
under the provisions of the Metropolitan Region Scheme (MRS) (refer to Land Reserved
under the MRS section below);
• Where located within 200m of residential properties and other sensitive land uses, such as
schools and child day care facilities, care must be taken to ensure facilities are well designed,
and sited to minimise visual impact;
• Be integrated with the building it is attached to rather than free-standing or be designed to
have a minimal impact on the streetscape and surrounding properties;
• Be constructed using non-reflective materials of a colour that is compatible to the building it
is attached to, or the surrounding area within which it is located;
• Be located so to not have any significant adverse impacts on the visual character and amenity
of areas of natural conservation value, places of heritage significance, prominent landscape
features and significant views; and
• Be designed in such a manner as to permit the future co-location of other providers.
• If located within a building, the building is designed to minimise blank walls and be treated
with anti-graffiti coating.
Land Reserved under the MRS
3 The City accepts that in order to provide uninterrupted service coverage throughout the broader
area, Telecommunications operators may seek approval to locate within areas of significant local
natural conservation value.
There are a number of such areas within the City of Melville, including the Swan and Canning
River Foreshore areas (including Deep Water Point, Blackwall Reach, and Point Walter) Point
Walter and Melville Glades Golf Clubs, Wireless Hill Park, and the Piney Lakes Reserve.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 8/04/2026 9:37 AM Page 3 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Within such areas there will be a presumption against telecommunications development unless
it can be demonstrated that there will be no adverse impact on the landscape character or visual
amenity of the area.
In practice these areas are reserved under the provisions of the MRS, and as such the jurisdiction
for the determination of applications for telecommunications development within them rests with
the WAPC.
In considering applications for such development, the views of the City are however sought by
the WAPC, and unless the City is satisfied that development can take place without detriment to
the special landscape character or natural conservation value that the area has to offer, then the
application will be recommended for refusal.
This stance is consistent with advice contained within the State Governments “Guidelines for the
Location, Siting and Design of Telecommunications Infrastructure” which states that
telecommunication facilities that are visually intrusive should not be located within areas of
particular environmental significance such as foreshores. The Guidance also states that
telecommunications installations should not be located such that they are prominently visible
from significant vantage points including tourist routes, lookouts, and recreation sites. This is
necessary, it states, in order that the amenity and environmental value of such areas is
preserved.
Within the City of Melville, the areas reserved under the MRS comprise important strategic open
spaces. They provide an amenity to both residents and visitors of the City which should not be
undermined. For that reason, proposals for telecommunications development in such areas will
be the subject of considerable scrutiny.
Within Wireless Hill Park, the introduction of new and/or additional telecommunications
infrastructure must be justified in the context of this Policy. Wireless Hill Park has particular
heritage value in that it was home to one of Australia’s earliest telecommunications stations. As
such, whilst the siting of modern telecommunications equipment is seen to be consistent in
principle with the Parks historic standing as home to telecommunications infrastructure, the fact
that the Park has developed into one of Perth’s most significant and beautiful reserves, coupled
with its heritage value which must be preserved, means that proposals for new or additional
equipment will be closely scrutinised. Where development proposals are considered to detract
from the particular heritage value of the Park and its environs, the City will recommend that they
are refused.
Communications Facilities
4 Television aerials of standard design, in keeping with the area are permitted as of right.
5 Antennae, satellite dishes and the like not visible from the street.
6 Communications equipment located on residential properties that do not satisfy 4 and 5 above
are to satisfy the relevant Design Principles of the R-Codes.
7 Communications equipment located on non-residential properties which do not satisfy 4 or 5
above are to be located as follows:
• Not to project more than 1m above the overall height of the building;
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 8/04/2026 9:37 AM Page 4 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

• Of similar colour to the roof or background materials;
• Where the property adjoins a residential property, the equipment must not project more than
3m above ground level or be screened from view; and
• No more than two communications structures associated with any building.
• With measures such as surface mounting, concealment, colour coordination, camouflage
and landscaping in relation to equipment and cables.
Decommissioning
8 When existing telecommunications sites or equipment are no longer required, the sites or
equipment must be decommissioned, facilities removed and site reinstated to its original
condition or the building ‘made good’ if previously attached to a building.
Application Requirements
9 In accordance with the requirements of Clause 5.3 of Statement of Planning Policy 5.2
“Telecommunications Infrastructure”, all applications for telecommunications development must
be accompanied by:
• A site plan at a scale of 1:100 or 1:200 indicating the location of the proposed facility in
relation to any existing buildings and the lot boundaries;
• Graphic illustrations including photomontages or photographic perspectives to show the type
of facility proposed and its relationship with adjacent development;
• Elevation plans to show the extent, height, and appearance of the proposed facility;
• Details of the materials proposed to be used, including their colour;
• Any screening or fencing proposed;
• Details of any external lighting;
• Landscaping proposals, including details of any existing landscaping proposed to be
removed;
• A written submission outlining the following:
(a) Technical justification to demonstrate the need for the facility in terms of service
coverage, why the particular installation is required, and how the facility will relate
to the existing and proposed network of telecommunications infrastructure;
(b) The site selection process followed, including details of the search area
investigated;
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 8/04/2026 9:37 AM Page 5 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

(c) Details of any pre-application consultation;
(d) The maximum power output of the facility including radiofrequency electromagnetic
energy levels in accordance with the Industry Code for the Deployment of Radio
Communications Infrastructure 2002;
(e) The availability of all existing structures (not only those owned by the company
making the application) which may be suitable to accommodate the proposed
infrastructure;
(f) Whether the design allows for the future co-location of other service providers;
(g) A landscape and /or visual impact assessment ; and
(h) Any other information deemed necessary in order that an accurate assessment and
determination can be made.
Advertising Requirements
10 Telecommunications Facilities
(a) All applications for the installation of Telecommunication infrastructure which require
determination under the City’s Local Planning Scheme No. 6 are to be advertised to affected
adjoining and adjacent landowners in accordance with the provisions of the Regulations and
the City’s Local Planning Policy 1.1 – Planning Processes and Decision Making.
11 Communications Facilities
Where applications for the installation of Communications equipment under the City’s Local
Planning Scheme No. 6 do not satisfy Clause (3) , they are to be advertised to adjoining and
adjacent landowners in accordance with the provisions of Local Planning Policy 1.1 – Planning
Process and Decision Making.
12 Notification to Elected Members
Notification of all applications for telecommunication installations (including exempt applications)
will, be brought to the attention of Elected Members via the Elected Members Bulletin.
References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Telecommunications Act 1997
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No. 6
Residential Design Codes of Western Australia
LPP1.1: Planning Process and Decision Making
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 8/04/2026 9:37 AM Page 6 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Delegated Authority No: DA-020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Ordinary Meeting of Council 19/07/2011 P11/3225
Reviews
Ordinary Meeting of Council 18/03/2014 P14/3475
Ordinary Meeting of Council 15/09/2015 P15/3657
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/09/2016 P16/3718
Ordinary Meeting of Council 17/03/2026 UP25/95
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 8/04/2026 9:37 AM Page 7 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.