Parking and Access
This document outlines the assessment criteria for parking and access for development in the City
of Melville. This policy is applicable to residential, commercial and mixed use developments within
the City of Melville.
If you are searching for general information in relation to planning requirements, please refer to the
Planning Services page of the our website https://www.melvillecity.com.au/ or alternatively you can
speak to one of our planning officers either on the phone, 9364 066 or in person at 10 Almondbury
Road, Booragoon during business hours, 8.30am – 5:00pm Monday to Friday.
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP1.6
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 20 May 2025
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development (Local
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (Regulations) and the City of Melville Local Planning Scheme
No. 6 (LPS No.6). This Local Planning Policy may be cited as Local Planning Policy No. 1.6 –Parking
and Access (LPP1.6).
Policy Objectives
The objectives of this policy are as follows:
• To facilitate the development of adequate, safe and convenient parking facilities that meets the
needs of users.
• Promote environmentally sustainable development.
• Facilitate active, vibrant and successful places.
• Support local businesses and economically viable development.
• Enable healthy lifestyles and travel choices.
• To ensure that development proposals incorporate an appropriate level of parking.
• To ensure safe, convenient, and efficient access for pedestrians, cyclists and motorists.
• To promote alternative transport modes by incorporating flexibility to reduce parking
requirements where alternative transport options exist.
• To promote ‘shared’ or publicly available parking in preference to exclusive, single user parking
for non-residential developments.
Policy Scope
This policy provides standards for parking, design and access for residential and non-residential
development in all areas, except where varied by an approved Precinct Structure Plan, Structure
Plan or Local Development Plan.
This policy prevails to the extent of any inconsistency with LPP 3.1 – Residential Development.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 1 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Policy Application
This policy applies to all development on land where Local Planning Scheme No. 6 applies.
The R-Codes allow for local governments to alter the ‘deemed to comply’ and ‘acceptable outcomes’
of the R-Codes to provide ‘as of right’ pathways for development which is more considerate of local
character, community requirements, climate and the environment. Local planning policies may be
used to facilitate contextually appropriate design within a local government area. A local government
may adopt a local planning policy that amends, replaces and/or augments a deemed-to-comply
provision of the R-Codes Volume 1 in accordance with 3.2.3a and 3.2.3b, subject to satisfying the
criteria of 3.1(i)-(v). This modification to the R-Codes through a local planning policy is different to
seeking discretion under the ‘design principles’ or ‘element objectives’ of the R-Codes.
Part 1 of the 'Policy Requirements' applies to all development to which the R-Codes applies. This
Policy should be read in conjunction with the R-Codes, including the relevant definitions unless
modified by This Policy.
Part 2 of the 'Policy Requirements applies to all non-residential development on land where Local
Planning Scheme No. 6 applies, including in respect of the non-residential components of a mixed
use development.
Definitions / Abbreviations Used In Policy
Terms used in this policy have the same meaning as in the Planning and Development (Local
Planning Schemes) Regulations, the R-Codes or other State Planning Policy unless otherwise noted
below.
AS2890.1:2004
The Australian and New Zealand Standards (AS/NZS) 2890.1.2004 Parking Facilities: Off street
Parking.
Activity Centres
Centres defined by the WAPC State Planning Policy 4.2: Activity Centres and City of Melville Local
Planning Strategy.
Health Consultant
Any professionally qualified and trained health professional who provides health services to patients
independently of another health professional (eg. does not include nurses assisting a doctor or
dentist).
LPS6
Local Planning Scheme No. 6
Net Lettable Area (NLA)
Means the area of all floors within the internal finished surfaces of permanent walls but excluding:
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 2 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

(a) all stairs, toilets, cleaner’s cupboards, lift shafts and motor rooms, escalators, tea rooms
and plant rooms, and other service areas;
(b) lobbies between lifts facing other lifts serving the same floor;
(c) areas set aside as public spaces or thoroughfares and not for the exclusive use of
occupiers of the floor or building;
(d) areas set aside for the provision of facilities or services to the floor or building where such
facilities are not for the exclusive use of occupiers of the floor or building.
Parking
Where the term parking is used, it may refer to the inclusion of bicycle, car, service vehicle, specialist
vehicle, motorcycle, or scooter parking.
Parking Management Plans (PMP)
PMPs are documents which provide guidance in relation to the management and control of all public
and privately owned parking and access to an Activity Centre for a 10 year period.
Public Floor Area (PFA)
The publicly accessible areas in bars, restaurants, fast food premises, places of worship and other
places used for dining, entertainment or congregation purposes but excluding the following areas:
(a) Alfresco areas located off-site;
(b) Alfresco areas located on-site which are not covered by solid roofing materials.
(c) Areas occupied by lifts, stairways, ramps, passages, hallways, lobbies and the like; and
(d) Areas set aside for staff only.
Reciprocal parking
Parking facilities serving separate uses, but not shared concurrently between the users and not
necessarily on one site.
R-Codes
Residential Design Codes Volume 1 and Residential Design Codes Volume 2 - Apartments, as
amended
Shared parking
Shared parking facilities available to the public at all times.
Travel Plan
A travel plan is a document which sets out how on-site parking and access will be managed once a
development is completed to encourage safe, healthy and sustainable travel options.
WAPC
Western Australian Planning Commission
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 3 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Policy Requirements
Part 1: Residential Development
R-Codes Volume 1
As permitted by clause 3.2.3a and b of the R-Codes- Volume 1, this policy replaces the following
Deemed to Comply provisions of the R-Codes Volume 1:
R-Codes – Volume 1 – Part B – Low Density
R-Code Modified Deemed-to-Comply Provision
Clause
Clause C5 is replaced with the following:
5.2.5
Sightlines C5A For driveways serving a single house or three or less grouped dwellings,
development meets the deemed-to-comply provisions within Clause 5 ‘Sight
Lines’ of Local Planning Policy 3.1 Residential Development; or
C5B For driveways serving developments containing four or more grouped
dwellings, sight lines and visual truncation requirements to be designed in
accordance with clause 3.2.4 and Figure 3.3 of AS2890.1:2004 (or as
amended).
C5C For internal driveways, driveways from right of ways or communal streets,
walls, fences and other structures truncated or reduced to no higher than
0.75m within 1.5m of where they adjoin vehicle access points (Refer Figure
9A of the R-Codes).
Clause C5.3A Driveways to be:
5.3.5
Vehicular • no closer than 0.5m from a side lot boundary or street pole;
Access
• no closer than 6m to a street corner as required under AS2890.1;
• aligned at right angles to the street alignment;
• located so as to avoid street trees, or, where this is unavoidable, the
street trees replaced at the applicant’s expense or replanting
arrangements to be approved by the decision-maker; and
• adequately paved and drained.
• where serving 3 or less residential dwellings, gradients to be designed
in accordance with section 2.6.2 of AS 2890.1:2004 (as amended); or
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 4 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

• where serving 4 or more residential dwellings, gradients to be
designed in accordance with section 3.3 a) of AS 2890.1:2004 (as
amended).
R-Codes – Volume 1 – Part C – Medium Density
R-Code Modified Deemed-to-Comply Provision
Clause
Clause C3.7.3A Driveways should be:
3.7 -
Access i. a minimum 3 m wide;
ii. a maximum 6m wide at the street boundary;
iii. set back 0.3m from a side lot boundary or street pole;
iv. setback 6m to a street corner (refer Figure 3.7b);
v. aligned at right angles to the road carriageway;
vi. adequately trafficable and drained;
vii. located so as to avoid street trees,;
viii. where serving 3 or less residential dwellings, gradients to be designed in
accordance with section 2.6.2 of AS 2890.1:2004 (as amended); or
ix. where serving 4 or more residential dwellings, gradients to be designed in
accordance with section 3.3 a) of AS 2890.1:2004 (as amended).
Note: Where removing a street tree is unavoidable, the City will require the street
tree to be replaced at the landowner/applicant’s expense or through replanting
arrangements to be approved by the City.
Clause C3.7.7 Walls, fences and other structures truncated or reduced to no higher than
3.7 - 0.75m within 1.5m of where walls, fences, or other structures adjoin:
Access
i. a driveway that intersects a street, right-of-way or communal street;
ii. a right-of-way or communal street that intersects a public street;
iii. two streets that intersect. (refer Figure 3.7e); and
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 5 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

iv. internal driveways
C3.7.7A One pier to a maximum width of 0.35m located within the truncation
area. In order to minimise the obstruction caused by development in
the truncation area, the wall height in the truncation area to be a
maximum of 0.75m measured from the verge height and fencing above
to be 80% visually permeable.
C3.7.7B For driveways serving developments containing 4 or more grouped
dwellings, with or without a footpath in the adjoining verge area, sight
lines and visual truncation requirements to be designed in accordance
with clause 3.2.4 and Figure 3.3 of AS2890.1
If a proposal does not meet the deemed to comply standards as amended by this policy, then
assessment against the relevant design principles will be required. The following information will be
required to demonstrate development is in accordance with the relevant design principles, in addition
to any other documentation required by Appendix 3 – Application documentation of the R-Codes-
Volume 1.
R-Codes – Volume 1 – Part B – Low Density
Clause Additional Development Application Documentation
5.2.5 Pedestrian Sightlines
Sightlines
Where pedestrian sightlines are not provided in accordance with AS2980.1 a risk
assessment report with proposed mitigation measures should be lodged in support
of the proposal. The report is to be prepared by a suitably qualified traffic engineer
demonstrating that the proposal will not result in any unacceptable safety risk to
occupants, footpath/verge users and road users. If the risk assessment and
proposed mitigation measures are acceptable to the City, the development to be
subject to a condition which requires that the mitigation measures to be
implemented prior to the occupation of the development and measures retained in
perpetuity to the satisfaction of the City.
Potential mitigation measures may include, among other things:
a) using changes in materials, colour, levels or landscaping to delineate
pedestrian and vehicle circulation areas and define pedestrian paths in
shared areas;
b) locating vehicle entries to minimise ramp lengths and excavation;
c) where required, incorporating aesthetically pleasing traffic calming
devices that are integrated into the design such as changes in paving
material or textures;
d) reducing parts of the driveway to allow for the incorporation of deep soil
areas;
e) minimising the visual impact of unavoidable long driveways through
changing alignments and screen planting;
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 6 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

f) use of convex mirrors within the property boundary, signage, intelligent
pedestrian and/or vehicle warning system at car park exit;
g) any other measure which improves pedestrian and vehicle safety
ensuring that drivers exiting the site have adequate visibility of oncoming
pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles.
Notwithstanding the above, each circumstance needs to be considered on its
merits and the City may not necessarily support a performance-based solution
provided above.
Clause Ramp Gradients
5.3.5
Where ramp gradients are not provided in accordance with AS2980.1 a risk
Vehicular
assessment report with proposed mitigation measures should be The report is to
Access
be prepared by a suitably qualified traffic engineer demonstrating that the proposal
will not result in any unacceptable safety risk to occupants, footpath users and road
users. If the risk assessment and proposed mitigation measures are acceptable to
the City, the development is to be subject to a condition which requires that the
mitigation measures to be implemented prior to the occupation of the development
and measures retained in perpetuity to the satisfaction of the City.
Potential mitigation measures may include, among other things:
a) the design provides for safe access and legible access for pedestrians
and vehicles;
b) the design reduces the impact of access points on the streetscape and
minimises the number of vehicle crossovers;
c) the design incorporates high quality landscaping features;
d) the design can manage stormwater run-off from car park surfaces, the
incorporation of tree pits, vegetated swales, bio-filters, infiltration cells,
permeable paving and/or on-site detention tanks as appropriate;
e) driveways where vehicle or pedestrian activity is unlikely to be a concern.
For example, a car park entrance exiting onto a cul-de-sac bulb or similar;
f) excavation is be minimised through efficient car park layouts and ramp
design or
g) sustainability measures such as retaining embodied carbon from existing
parking components on-site are incorporated.
h) the uses of convex mirrors within the property boundary, signage or
intelligent pedestrian warning system at car park exit;
i) any other measure which improves pedestrian and vehicle safety
ensuring that drivers exiting the site have adequate visibility of oncoming
pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles or where drivers and pedestrians are
warned about the potential hazard.
Notwithstanding the above, each circumstance needs to be considered on its
merits and the City may not necessarily support a performance-based solution
provided above.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 7 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

R-Codes – Volume 1 – Part C – Medium Density
R-Code Additional Development Application Documentation
Clause
Clause Where pedestrian sightlines or ramp gradients are not provided in accordance with
3.7 - AS2980.1 a risk assessment report with proposed mitigation measures should be
lodged in support of the proposal. The report is to be prepared by a suitably qualified
Access
traffic engineer demonstrating that the proposal vary the provisions of AS2890 in
relation to pedestrian sightlines and vehicle ramp gradients will not result in any
unacceptable safety risk to occupants, footpath users and road users.
If the risk assessment and proposed mitigation measures are acceptable to the City,
the development is to be subject to a condition which requires that the mitigation
measures to be implemented prior to the occupation of the development and
measures retained in perpetuity to the satisfaction of the City.
Potential mitigation measures may include, among other things:
a) using changes in materials, colour, levels or landscaping to delineate
pedestrian and vehicle circulation areas and define pedestrian paths
and calm traffic in shared areas;
b) the design reduces the impact of access points on the streetscape
and minimises the number of vehicle crossovers;
c) the design incorporates high quality landscaping features
d) locating vehicle entries and designing car parking to minimise ramp
lengths and excavation;
e) the design can manage stormwater run-off from car park surfaces,
the incorporation of tree pits, vegetated swales, bio-filters, infiltration
cells, permeable paving and/or on-site detention tanks as
appropriate;
f) locate driveways where vehicle or pedestrian activity is unlikely to
be a concern. For example, a car park entrance exiting onto a cul-
de-sac bulb or similar;
g) sustainability measures such as retaining embodied carbon from
existing parking components on-site are incorporated.
h) use of convex mirrors within the property boundary, signage,
intelligent pedestrian and/or vehicle warning system at car park exit;
g) any other measure which improves pedestrian and vehicle safety
ensuring that drivers exiting the site have adequate visibility of
oncoming pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles.
Notwithstanding the above, each circumstance needs to be considered on its merits
and the City may not necessarily support a performance-based solution provided
above.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 8 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

R-Codes Volume 2
As permitted by clause 1.2.2 and 1.2.3 of the R-Codes- Volume 2, this policy replaces the following
Acceptable Outcomes of the R-Codes Volume 2:
R-Codes – Volume 2
R-Code Modified Acceptable Outcome Provision
Element
Element A3.8.7 is replaced with the following:
3.8 –
Vehicle A3.8.7 Sight lines and visual truncation requirements, with or without a footpath
Access in the adjoining verge area, designed in accordance with clause 3.2.4 and
Figure 3.3 of AS2890.1: 2004 (as amended).
Element A 3.9.4
3.9 – Car
and a) Car parking and vehicle circulation areas, including driveway and access
vehicular point gradients, are designed in accordance with AS2890.1(as amended);
Access
b) The gradient of access driveways, for developments containing 3 or less
residential dwellings to be designed in accordance with section 2.6.2 of
AS/NZS 2890.1(as amended); and
c) The gradient of access driveways for developments containing 4 or more
residential dwellings, with or without a footpath in the adjoining verge
area, to be designed in accordance with section 3.3 (a) of AS/NZS
2890.1(as amended).
If a proposal does not meet the Acceptable Outcomes as amended by this policy, then assessment
against the relevant Element Objectives will be required. The following information will be required
to demonstrate development is in accordance with the relevant Element Objectives, in addition to
any other documentation required by Appendix 5 – Application development application guidance
under the R-Codes Volume 2:
R-Codes – Volume 2
Clause Additional Development Application Guidance
Element Where pedestrian sightlines are not provided in accordance with AS2980.1,
3.8 – a risk assessment report with proposed mitigation measures should be
Vehicle lodged in support of the proposal. The report is to be prepared by a suitably
Access qualified traffic engineer demonstrating that the proposal will not result in
any unacceptable safety risk to occupants, footpath/verge users and road
users. If the risk assessment and proposed mitigation measures are
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 9 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

acceptable to the City, the development is to be subject to a condition which
requires that the mitigation measures to be implemented prior to the
occupation of the development and measures retained in perpetuity to the
satisfaction of the City.
Potential mitigation measures may include, among other things:
a) changes in materials, colour, levels or landscaping to delineate
pedestrian and vehicle circulation areas and define pedestrian paths in
shared areas;
b) locating vehicle entries to minimise ramp lengths and excavation;
c) where required, incorporating aesthetically pleasing traffic calming
devices that are integrated into the design such as changes in paving
material or textures;
d) reducing parts of the driveway to allow for the incorporation of deep soil
areas;
e) minimising the visual impact of unavoidable long driveways through
changing alignments and screen planting;
f) use of convex mirrors;
g) any other measure which improves pedestrian and vehicle safety
ensuring that vehicles exiting the site have adequate visibility of
oncoming pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles.
Notwithstanding the above, each circumstance needs to be considered on its
merits and the City may not necessarily support a performance-based
solution provided above.
Element Where vehicle ramp gradients are not provided in accordance with AS2890.1,
3.9 – Car a risk assessment report with proposed mitigation measures to be lodged in
support of the proposal. The report is to be prepared by a suitably qualified
and
traffic engineer demonstrating that the proposal will not result in any
vehicular
unacceptable safety risk to occupants, footpath/verge users and road users.
Access
If the risk assessment and proposed mitigation measures are acceptable to
the City, the development is to be subject to a condition which requires that
the mitigation measures to be implemented prior to the occupation of the
development and measures retained in perpetuity to the satisfaction of the
City.
Potential mitigation measures may include, among other things:
j) the design provides for safe access and legible access for pedestrians
and vehicles;
k) the design reduces the impact of access points on the streetscape and
minimises the number of vehicle crossovers;
l) the design incorporates high quality landscaping features;
m) the design can manage stormwater run-off from car park surfaces, the
incorporation of tree pits, vegetated swales, bio-filters, infiltration cells,
permeable paving and/or on-site detention tanks as appropriate;
n) driveways where vehicle or pedestrian activity is unlikely to be a concern.
For example, a car park entrance exiting onto a cul-de-sac bulb or similar;
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 10 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

o) excavation is be minimised through efficient car park layouts and ramp
design or
p) sustainability measures such as retaining embodied carbon from existing
parking components on-site are incorporated.
q) the uses of convex mirrors within the property boundary, signage or
intelligent pedestrian warning system at car park exit;
r) any other measure which improves pedestrian and vehicle safety
ensuring that drivers exiting the site have adequate visibility of oncoming
pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles or where drivers and pedestrians are
warned about the potential hazard.
Notwithstanding the above, each circumstance needs to be considered on its
merits and the City may not necessarily support a performance-based
solution provided above.
Part 2: Non-Residential Development
1 Access
1.1 Vehicular access points to parking facilities are to be located and designed in accordance
with AS 2890.1.
1.2 Access Driveways, to be designed with a ramp gradient in accordance with section 3.3 (a) of
AS 2890.1.
1.3 Access provided via secondary streets or rights of way where available.
1.4 Access to developments on corner lots should be located the maximum distance away from
the corner on the minor road or right of way.
1.5 One access point per street is encouraged and the number of access points should be kept
to a minimum.
1.6 All vehicles utilising on-site parking bays should be able to enter and exit a site in a forward
gear.
1.7 Where possible, new parking facilities and access points are to be linked to existing parking
facilities both within the site and to those on adjacent sites. The City may require as a
condition of any approval that parking facilities and access points which have the opportunity
to provide for shared access across sites are subject to an easement in gross to the benefit
of the City for the purpose of public access.
1.8 Access points designed to minimise:
(a) traffic or pedestrian hazards,
(b) conflict with pedestrian/cyclist pathways,
(c) the impact on nearby residential uses,
(d) traffic congestion, and
(e) interference with public transport facilities.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 11 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

2 Parking Design
2.1 The design of parking facilities should comply fully with the relevant Australian Standards.
2.2 Entry and exit points and vehicle circulation patterns are to be clearly indicated.
2.3 Car stacking systems or other such systems may be supported subject to the submission of
a parking management plan detailing the operation of the system.
2.4 The design of entrances and exits and the position of parking control equipment (in the case
of public car parks) to prevent on-street queuing of vehicles seeking entry to a parking facility
and minimise disruption to pedestrians and traffic flows.
2.5 Design of a parking facility including internal circulation roadways and ramps within a public
or private car park to be designed in accordance with AS 2890.1.
3 Sight lines
3.1 Sight lines and visual truncation requirements for exiting vehicles to be designed in
accordance with Clause 3.2.4 and Figure 3.3 of AS 2890.1:2004.1 (as amended).
4 Variations to policy requirements 1 - 3 above
4.1 Where the policy measures at 1 - 3 above are not able to be achieved, a performance based
solution may be considered. A performance-based solution, if sought, is to be supported by
report which includes a risk assessment and proposed mitigation measures. The report is to
be prepared by a suitably qualified traffic engineer demonstrating that the proposal will not
result in any unacceptable safety risk to occupants, footpath/verge users and road users and
that the proposal does not present an unacceptable risk to the efficiency of the local road
network.
4.2 If the risk assessment and proposed mitigation measures are acceptable to the City, and the
proposal ultimately approved, the development to be subject to a condition which requires
that the mitigation measures contemplated by the report to be implemented prior to the
occupation of the development and measures retained in perpetuity to the satisfaction of the
City.
5 On Site Car Parking
5.1. Car parking bays are to be provided in accordance with the ratios set out in Table 1 below for:
(a) all new developments; or
(b) modifications to existing developments which result in an increase to the NLA or PFA; or
(c) a change of use to a use which requires more car parking than existing.
5.2. Where a modification to an existing development or a change of use is proposed which results
in additional NLA or PFA and/or creates an additional demand for car parking, additional bays
are to be provided in accordance with Table 1 below.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 12 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Table 1: Car parking ratios
Uses Car Parking Requirements
Community Uses
Child Care Premises One bay per 10 children, plus 0.5 bays per staff member.
Educational Establishment In addition to the ratios below, where it is proposed to add
one or more additional classrooms to any existing
Educational Establishment, a Travel Plan is required to be
submitted for approval.
Pre-primary & Primary
6 bays available for use as a pick up and drop off area plus
0.5 bays per staff member.
Secondary
0.5 bays per staff member
Tertiary/Technical
1 bay per 5 students, plus 0.5 bays per staff member.
Place of Worship 1 bay per 10m² PFA, plus 0.5 bay per staff member.
Food and Entertainment
Bed and Breakfast 1 bay per guest bedroom, in addition to the R-Codes
Accommodation parking requirement for the dwelling.
Cinema / Theatre / Public 1 bay per 5 patrons at capacity, plus 0.5 bay per staff
Amusement member.
Hotel / Tavern 1 bay per 10m² PFA, plus 0.5 bay per staff member, plus
1 bay per bedroom.
Restaurant / Café / Small Bar / 1 bay per 10m² PFA, plus 0.5 bay per staff member.
Lunch Bar / Fast Food Outlet
Health Uses
Recreation – Private 1 bay per 20m² NLA for individual recreation activities or 1
bay per 4 patrons at capacity for grouped based
recreational activities.
Hospital / 1 bay per 3 beds, plus 0.5 bays per staff member
(including health consultants). Ambulance and hospital
bus parking bays as required by the City.
Medical Centre / Consulting 3 bays per health consultant, plus 0.5 bay per staff
Rooms / Veterinary Clinic member (including health consultants).
Office
Office 1 bay per 50m² NLA.
Retail
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 13 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Shop / Home Store / 1 bay per 20m² NLA
Convenience Store / Restricted
Premises
Large Scale Retail or Wholesale
Auction Premises 1 bay per 40m² of land or building area used for auction
purposes, plus 0.5 bay per staff member.
Car Sales Premises / Open Air 1 bay per 100m² of display or sale area, plus 0.5 bays per
Display staff member.
Garden Centre / Plant Nursery 1 bay per 50m² of land or buildings used for display or sale.
Service Station 0.5 bay per staff member.
Showroom 1 bay per 40m² NLA.
Industry
Light Industry / Service Industry 1 bay per 50m² NLA, with a minimum of 4 bays for each
unit.
Industry General 1 bay per 200m² NLA.
Motor Vehicle Hire/Repair/Sales 3 bays per service bay plus 0.5 bay per staff member.
Motor Vehicle Wrecking 6 customer bays plus 0.5 bay per staff member.
Storage / Warehouse 1 bay per 100m² NLA.
Other
Other uses not listed above At the discretion of the Council, having regard to similar
uses, the precinct, the site, surrounding uses, off-site
parking availability and having regard to recognised car
parking standards for similar uses.
5.3. Where the car parking ratio specified in Table 1 results in a requirement for a part bay, the car
parking requirement to be rounded to the nearest whole number.
5.4. Car parking for staff members referenced in Table 1 above are to be calculated based upon
the maximum number of staff in attendance at any one time.
5.5. Universal parking bays
(a) Car parking bays marked exclusively for use by drivers with disabilities at the rate
specified in the Building Code of Australia and relevant Australian Standard (AS28990.1)
are to be provided.
(b) These bays are included within the car parking requirements set out in Table 1.
5.6. Tandem parking bays will generally only be accepted where the two bays are provided for the
use of a single tenancy and where the use would allow for this practice.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 14 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

5.7. The City supports the use of sensitively located car stacking systems.
5.8. On-site parking should be located behind the building line or within the building where possible.
Parking within the front setback area of a development is discouraged.
5.9. The City encourages the early consideration of electric vehicle charging infrastructure for
both employees and visitor bays. As part of the development application, applicants are
encouraged to demonstrate that, the development has been designed with for future capacity
to supply electric vehicle charging points taking into account the WAPC Position Statement –
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure March 2024.
6. Specialist Vehicles and Service and/or loading bays
6.1. For developments with a NLA of greater than 500m² at least one service or loading bay to be
set aside and marked for the exclusive use of service, delivery and courier vehicles between
7am – 7pm each day.
6.2. For developments/land uses where larger passenger vehicles are often parked or service the
activity, specialist bays may be required to accommodate these vehicles.
6.3. The service or loading bay or specialist vehicle bay is in addition to the car parking
requirements set out in Table 1.
6.4. The bay(s) are to be of a suitable size and location for the nature of the land uses proposed.
7. Motorcycle / scooter parking bays
7.1. Where 15 or more car parking bays are provided on a development site, motorcycle / scooter
parking bays are required to be provided in accordance with Table 2 below.
7.2. Where motorcycle / scooter parking bays are required, the number of parking bays required
by Table 1 above, can be reduced at a ratio of one car parking bay reduction for every two
motorcycle / scooter parking bays provided.
Table 2: Motorcycle and scooter parking requirements
Car Bays Required by Table 1 Number of Motorcycle / Scooter parking
bays required
0-14 0
15 - 29 2
30 - 44 4
45 - 59 6
60 - 74 8
75 - 89 10
90+ At the discretion of the City.
8. Bicycle parking facilities
8.1. A minimum of two bicycle parking facilities are to be provided on a subject site unless a greater
number is specified in Table 3 below.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 15 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

8.2. The ratios specified in Table 3 below are to be applied based upon the car parking bays that
the development requires in Table 1 less any variations that are permitted by Part 6 of this
policy.
Table 3 Bicycle parking requirements
Uses Bike parking requirements
Community Uses
Child Care Centre 2 per 10 car parking bays
Educational Establishment 6 per 10 car parking bays
Family Day Care None applicable.
Places of Worship 2 per 10 car parking bays.
Health Uses
Recreation – Private / Hospital / 2 per 10 car parking bays.
Medical Centre / Consulting
Rooms / Veterinary Clinic
Food and Entertainment
Bed and Breakfast None applicable.
Accommodation
Cinema / Theatre / Public 1 bay per 10 patrons at capacity.
Amusement
Hotel / Tavern / Restaurant / Café 2 per 10 car parking bays.
/ Small Bar / Lunch Bar / Fast
Food Outlet
Office
Office 3 per 10 car parking bays.
Retail
Shop / Home Store / 2 per 10 car parking bays.
Convenience Store / Restricted
Premises
Large Scale Retail or Wholesale
Auction Premises / Car Sales 1 per 10 car parking bays.
Premises / Open Air Display /
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 16 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Garden Centre / Plant Nursery /
Showroom
Service Station Not applicable
Industry
Light Industry / Service Industry / 1 per 10 car parking bays.
Motor Vehicle Hire/Repair/Sales
/ Motor Vehicle Wrecking /
General Industry / Storage /
Warehouse
Other
Other uses not listed above At the discretion of the Council, having regard to similar
uses, the precinct, the site and off-site bicycle parking
availability.
8.3. Bicycle spaces are to comply with Australian Standard AS 2890.3: Parking facilities – Bicycle
parking facilities (as amended) and are to be conveniently and safely located.
8.4. End of trip facilities are required where more than 6 bicycle spaces are required by Table 3
above, as follows:
(a) A minimum of one locker for each bicycle space;
(b) A minimum of one unisex shower and change room. Additional shower facilities are to
be provided at a rate of one female shower and one male shower for every additional 10
bicycle parking bays, to a maximum of five female and five male showers per
development.
(c) The end of trip facilities are to be located as close as possible to the bicycle parking
facilities.
9. Variations to Parking Standards
9.1. The following clauses outline the criteria for reductions to the parking standards specified in
sections 5-8 above. In considering any reduction to standards, the City may request the
preparation and approval of a Travel Plan in accordance with Part 10 of this policy below.
9.2. Activity Centre Parking
(a) A reduction in the car parking requirements of Table 1 is acceptable within certain
Activity Centres due to their proximity to public transport and other public parking
infrastructure. Accordingly, the car parking requirements of Table 1 may be reduced
by up to 25% where the City is satisfied that:
(i) The development site is within an Activity Centre which is within the following
Secondary or District activity centres as designated by State Planning Policy
4.2: Activity Centres.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 17 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

(ii) The development proposal is consistent with an approved Parking
Management Plan for the centre.
9.3 Reciprocal Parking
(a) The City can consider reciprocal parking arrangements as follows:
i. Up to 100 per cent of the parking requirement specified in Table 1 where
there is no overlap in operating times, or
ii. Up to 50 per cent of the parking requirement specified in Table 1 where there
is partial overlap in operating times.
(b) Reciprocal parking arrangements may be considered acceptable where the City is
satisfied that an appropriate level of parking is provided for the uses on the subject
site and any other site applicable to the reciprocal arrangement.
(c) The parking facilities serving the uses will be located on the one lot, or if located on
a separate lot, the parking arrangements are permanent (e.g., through an easement,
amalgamation, legal agreement, condition of approval, or any other formal
arrangement acceptable to the City).
(d) The parking facilities are conveniently located to both developments.
(e) Supported by parking studies for a similar development(s) within a similar land use.
(f) Reciprocal parking arrangements can be considered within individual mixed use
development sites and/or between different development sites.
9.4 Shared Parking
Shared parking is encouraged within certain Activity Centres to allow parking facilities to be
used more efficiently.
(a) Where car parking bays required by Table 1 are designated as part of the development
application as shared parking, the car parking requirements of Table 1 may be reduced
by 25% (for the proportion of bays which are designated as shared parking only) where
the City is satisfied that:
i. An appropriate level of parking is provided for the proposed uses;
ii. The development site is within an Activity Centre which is designated as a
Secondary or District activity centre by State Planning Policy 4.2 – Activity
Centres; and
iii. There will be no structural or visual impediment to the use of the shared parking
bays by the public.
9.5 Additional Bicycle Parking
(a) The car parking requirements of Table 1 may be reduced by up to two car parking bays
where additional bicycle parking above that required by Part 8 of this policy is provided,
where the City is satisfied the following criteria are met:
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 18 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

i. The proposed development is within an Activity Centre which is designated as a
Secondary or District activity centre by State Planning Policy 4.2 as outlined in
6.4.2(b) above.
ii. Bicycle parking is provided at the rate of six bicycle spaces per car bay reduction;
and
iii. The City considers there to be a need for additional bike parking in the area; and
iv. The bicycle parking is to be located so to be readily visible and accessible by the
public.
(b) Additional bicycle parking in lieu of on-site car parking may be considered by the City
where the car parking requirement for the development (as prescribed by Table 1) is
more than 50 bays, subject to the criteria set out within 9.5.1 (a) – (d) above.
10 Travel Plans
10.1 The preparation of a Travel Plan is to be undertaken by an applicant where specified within
this Policy.
10.2 The objectives of a Travel Plan are to include (at a minimum):
(a) How to reduce the need for staff and visitors to travel to and from the site in a private
vehicle.
(b) How to promote staff and visitors walking, cycling and using public transport to access
the development.
(c) How to achieve the minimum number of single occupancy vehicle movements to and
from the development.
10.3 A Travel Plan is to detail a range of measures that will be integrated into the design and
occupation of the new development and include at a minimum:
(a) Identification of:
i. On-site parking bays
ii. Publicly available (including details of any parking restrictions) parking bays
within the vicinity of the development which are available for visitor and/or staff
parking;
iii. Location of public transport in relation to the development;
iv. Bicycle facilities on-site and within the area;
v. Connectivity of pedestrian footpaths within the area which provide access to the
site.
vi. Impact of topography of walkways and cycleways
vii. Impacts of weather and seasons on walking and cycling behaviour; and
viii. Walking and Cycling time;
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 19 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

ix. Impact on total journey time
(b) Any measures including parking management and/or marketing that are proposed to
achieve the objectives of the Travel Plan. Measures can include (but are not limited to):
i. Promoting walking, cycling and use of public transport by both staff and visitors;
ii. Support and promotion of measures to discourage staff single occupancy vehicle
movements to and from the development, which could include car sharing etc.
iii. Encouragement of working from home and video conferencing.
iv. Education of staff and visitors about alternative ways to access the development.
v. Way finding strategies.
vi. Consideration of on-site parking restrictions.
(c) Identification of targets to measure the effectiveness of the Travel Plan in achieving its
objectives and how these will be implemented, measured and monitored.
10.4 Once the Travel Plan is approved, the management of the on-site parking and access is to
be undertaken in accordance with the Travel Plan.
10.5 The content of Travel Plans can be utilised in the preparation of PMPs.
11 Parking Management Plans (PMPs)
11.1 PMPs are to be prepared and adopted for all Activity Centres and are to provide guidance
over a 10 year planning period in relation to the management and control of parking in the
centre.
11.2 A PMP may be required to support a shared parking arrangement or where there are a
number of different building users and allocation considerations which require on-going
management.
11.3 The City will be responsible for the preparation and adoption of PMPs in the first instance,
however where a significant redevelopment in an activity centre is proposed, the City may
require an applicant to prepare or contribute toward the preparation of a PMP for the centre.
11.4 PMPs not only relate to management of on-site parking bays but also include information as
to the location and management of on-street paid parking, time restrictions, residents
parking, car park buildings, bicycle parking facilities, universal bays, reductions in parking
and access to public transport.
11.5 Once a PMP is adopted by the City for an Activity Centre, all future developments are to be
in accordance with the PMP.
12 Traffic Generation
12.1 The City follows the WAPC Transport Assessment Guidelines for Developments (as revised)
in relation to the requirement for transport assessments.
12.2 Where it is identified by these Guidelines that a development requires a Transport Statement
or Transport Assessment, this is to be prepared by a suitably qualified and/or experienced
traffic engineer and submitted with the application for planning approval.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 1:00 PM Page 20 of 21
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015 (as amended)
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No. 6
Residential Design Codes Volume 1 and Residential
Design Codes Volume 2 - Apartments
Australian Standard AS 2890.1:2004 Parking Facilities –
Off-Street Parking (as amended)
Australian Standard AS 2890.3: Parking Facilities –
Bicycle Parking Facilities (as amended)
Western Australian Planning Commission Transport
Assessment Guidelines for Development
Delegated Authority No: DA-020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Planning and Development Services Committee 12/10/99 P99/1020
Reviews
Special Planning and Development Services Committee 27/06/00 P00/1004
Development & Neighbourhood Amenity Committee 14/05/02 P02/5006
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/9/11 P11/3249
Ordinary Meeting of Council 19/08/14 P14/3526
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/09/16 P16/3718
Administrative Review 6/8/2019
(Council Resolution 18/6/2019)
Western Australian Planning Commission
(Statutory Planning Committee) 26/02/2025 (808/02/17/0002P)
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/05/2025 UP25/68
Changes to this document can only be made by the Responsible Officer via a System Improvement Request
Printed version is uncontrolled and valid only at the time of printing
©Copyright 2009 City of Melville Page 21 of 21