Local Planning
Policy 2.3
Fremantle Port Buffer
Area Development
Guidelines
fremantle.wa.gov.au

Fremantle Port Buffer Area Development
Guidelines
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. This policy may be cited as Local Planning
Policy 2.3: Fremantle Port Buffer Area Development Guidelines (LPP 2.3).
Introduction
The purpose of this policy is to set out built form criteria and procedures for development
applications and scheme amendments affecting lots within the Fremantle Port Buffer
Zones within Appendix A.
Objectives
The policy has the following objectives:
• To provide clear development guidelines that seek to minimise potential impacts
that may arise from the Port;
• To promote land use compatibility between the Port and surrounding urban area;
• To enable continued urban development around the port whilst maintaining
efficient operation of the Port; and
• Outline clear administrative processes for referral and liaison between the
Fremantle Ports and the City.
Application of this Policy
This policy applies to land use and development for the land area identified in Appendix A.
Policy Provisions
1. Area 1
1.1 Development applications proposing greater than 50 dwellings shall be
supplemented with a formal risk assessment. The assessment shall clearly
demonstrate how the development will be designed and constructed in order to
ensure that the risk impacts from port operations to the occupants will be
maintained to “as low as reasonably practical” (ALARP).
1.2 Within Area 1, there is a requirement to control development in order to minimise
the following potential impacts:
1/8

a) Ingress of toxic gases in the event of an incident within the Port;
b) Shattering or flying glass as a consequence of an explosion within the Port;
c) Noise transmission emanating from the Port (attenuation in the order of
35dB(A) is required); and
d) Odour.
1.3 The following uses are considered sensitive non-residential land uses and are not to
be located within Area 1:
a) Childcare facilities;
b) Aged persons facilities;
c) Prisons;
d) Schools; and
e) Hospitals.
1.4 Residential uses within Area 1 may be considered to meet clause 1.1 of this policy
subject to adherence to the following built form requirements:
Windows and openings
a) The aggregate area of windows and doorways shall not exceed 40% of the
total area of the façade facing the Port Inner Harbour.
b) Any glass used for windows or other openings shall be laminated safety glass
of minimum thickness 12mm or “double glazed” utilising laminated or
toughened safety glass of minimum thickness 6mm.
c) Windows shall be fixed (non-opening). However, where this is not possible,
windows shall be of a “hopper” or “awning” style with a maximum opening
arc of 12.5 degrees.
d) All safety glass shall be manufactured and installed to an appropriate
Australian Standard.
e) All doors facing the port shall have automatic closure to a sealed state.
Balconies
f) Balconies shall not be provided to any facades facing the Port Inner Harbour.
Air-conditioning systems
g) All air-conditioning systems shall incorporate the following features:
i) multiple systems to have internally centrally located shut down point and
associated procedures for emergency use; and
ii) preference for split “refrigerate” systems.
Construction
h) All residential development shall incorporate the following minimum standards
of construction:
i) cavity masonry construction for external walls of residential buildings; and
2/8

ii) roof insulation.
1.5 The City recognises that requirement 1.4(a) may not be possible to achieve in the
case of the proposals involving the adaption / reuse of buildings of conservation and
heritage significance.
Alternative built form treatments may be considered subject to the applicant
satisfactorily demonstrating fulfilment of the potential risk and amenity
considerations outlined above. Alternative treatments shall be justified through
submission of professionally prepared and certified reports.
1.6 A notification will be required to be placed on the title advising the location may
experience noise, odour, light spill and other factors that arise from the normal
operations of a 24-hour working Port.
This notification will be included as a condition of approval for development
applications, and a recommendation to the Western Australian Planning Commission
on all subdivisions.
2. Area 2
2.1 The potential impacts in Area 2 are not as great as in Area 1. Nevertheless,
consideration is given to the following potential impacts:
a) Ingress of toxic gases in the event of an incident within the Port;
b) Shattering or flying glass as a consequence of explosion within the Port;
c) Noise transmission emanating from the Port (attenuation in the order of
30dB(A)) is required; and
d) Odour.
2.2 The built form requirements of clause 2.3 shall apply to the following categories of
development:
a) All residential development other than alternations and additions to existing
dwellings.
b) All non-residential development other than refurbishment / renovations (not
involving a nett increase in floor area) to existing buildings and non-
residential change of use proposals.
2.3 Within Area 2, buildings shall be designed so as to incorporate all design and
construction features outlined as follows:
Windows and openings
a) Any glass used for windows or other openings shall be laminated safety glass
of minimum thickness of 6mm or “double glazed” utilising laminated or
toughened safety glass of a minimum thickness of 3mm.
b) All safety glass shall be manufactured and installed to an appropriate
Australian Standard.
Air-conditioning systems
3/8

c) All air-conditioning systems shall incorporate the following features:
i) multiple systems to have internally centrally located shut down point and
associated procedures for emergency use; and
ii) preference for split “refrigerate” systems.
Construction
d) Residential developments must demonstrate they meet the Quiet House
requirements of State Planning Policy 5.4: Road and Rail Noise.
e) All developments shall incorporate roof insulation.
2.4 The City recognises that requirement 2.3(a) may not be possible to achieve in the
case of the proposals involving the adaption / reuse of buildings of conservation and
heritage significance.
Alternative built form treatments may be considered subject to the applicant
satisfactorily demonstrating fulfilment of the potential risk and amenity
considerations outlines above. Alternative treatments shall be justified through
submission of professionally prepared and certified reports.
2.5 Where development, including subdivision, incorporates additional sensitive uses,
notification or a memorial shall be placed on the title as outlined in 1.6 above.
3. Area 3
3.1 Generally the potential risk and amenity impacts from the Port are considerably
less in Area 3. Nevertheless, the Fremantle Inner Harbour Buffer Definition Study
has identified the potential for some noise and odour impacts in the area.
The intent of the policy for Area 3 is the management, as opposed to the control,
of sensitive uses.
3.2 There are no general buffer related development controls for Area 3. However,
where a specific location within this area is known to be impacted for port
operations (e.g. through a history of formal complaints), the City may, in
consultation with Fremantle Ports, apply some or all of the development controls
outlined in Area 2 above.
3.3 Where development, including subdivision, incorporates additional sensitive uses,
notification or a memorial shall be placed on the title, as outlined in 1.6 above, if
the specific location is known to be impacted from port operations as described
above.
4. Administrative Procedures
4.1 Applicants are encouraged to liaise with relevant staff, including those at Fremantle
Ports, in order to understand the requirements of this policy.
4/8

4.2 Within Area 1 all applications for development, including subdivision, shall be
referred to Fremantle Ports as soon as possible for comment prior to determination
of the application.
In the case of scheme amendments that effect the development potential of land,
the City shall notify Fremantle Ports as soon as practicable prior to initiating the
amendment.
4.3 Within Area 2 the City shall refer a proposal to Fremantle Ports where the proposal
seeks a variation to the development controls contained within this policy.
In the case of scheme amendments that would result in an increase or
intensification of sensitive uses, the City shall notify Fremantle Ports as soon as
practicable prior to initiating the amendment.
4.4 Within Area 3 the City shall refer a proposal to Fremantle Ports where the proposal
falls within a specific location that has been formally notified to Council as being
impacted from port operations.
In the case of scheme amendments that would result in an increase or
intensification of sensitive uses, the City shall notify Fremantle Ports as soon as
practicable prior to initiating the amendment.
4.5 For all areas, the City shall refer a proposal to Fremantle Ports where a proponent
seeks any significant variation to the development controls contained within this
policy.
4.6 Fremantle Port shall, within 14 days of notification, advise the City of Fremantle of
its assessment of a development proposal referred as per the requirements
outlined above.
4.7 The City shall require a building surveyor or suitably qualified structural engineer to
certify that the requirements of any conditions imposed as a result of this policy
have been fulfilled in accordance with the approved plans.
Where appropriate, certification shall be provided prior to the issue of a building
licence, certificate of clearance / classification or strata / subdivision clearance.
Definitions
Buffer Area means the area within which some land use and development is either
restricted or prohibited.
Sensitive Use means a use that the City considers may be affected by proximity to the
inner harbour of the Port of Fremantle. Uses include residential dwellings, major
recreational areas, childcare facilities, aged care facilities, prisons, hospitals, schools and
other institutional uses involving accommodation and any other use that the City considers
may be affected.
5/8

Residential uses means single houses, grouped or multiple dwellings and any type of
short-stay accommodation including tourist and visitor accommodation.
6/8

Appendix A
7/8

Responsibility and review information
Responsible officer: Manager Strategic Planning and City Design
Document Ordinary Meeting of Council – 8 March 2007
adoption/approval
details
Document 14 May 2025 – Ordinary Meeting of Council – C2505-11
amendment details
Next review date 14 May 2029
8/8