Position
Statement
Purpose-built student
accommodation
March 2026
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the Department © State of Western Australian website: wa.gov.au/dplh
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, Published by the
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result Perth WA 6000
of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect This document is available in alternative
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred Locked Bag 2506 formats on application to the
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before Perth WA 6001 Communications Branch.
applying the information contained in this document to Publication date: 30/3/2026
particular circumstances. Operational date: 30/3/2026

Position Statement
1
Purpose-built student accommodation
March 2026
1. Policy intent 2. Accommodation for 3. Application of this
students in WA position statement
To support the planning, design and
assessment of multi-storey purpose-
Student accommodation has been This position statement provides guidance
built student accommodation (PBSA) by
provided in Western Australia for decades when planning, designing and assessing
providing clear, outcomes-based guidance
in a variety of built forms. However, multi- multi-storey PBSA proposals across
that ensures design quality, supports
storey PBSA is an emerging development Western Australia. It can also inform the
functionality, and promotes positive health
type, and offers many benefits, including preparation of local planning strategies,
and wellbeing for students.
convenience, safety, and social interaction local planning scheme provisions and local
for students, making it an attractive and planning policies.
affordable housing option. Beyond
While the term ‘purpose-built student
meeting student needs, PBSA contribute
accommodation’ can refer to various
to vibrant and diverse urban centres,
student accommodation forms, the policy
fostering community life and supporting
measures contained within this position
local economies.
statement apply only to multi-storey PBSA.
Recent growth in this sector has
In assessing a development application:
highlighted the need for the State
planning policy framework, to provide i. Multi-storey PBSA proposals not
contemporary guidance for multi-storey defined as ‘Multiple Dwellings’
PBSA, to avoid delays and variable approval under the Residential Design Codes
outcomes across the State. More efficient (R-Codes), both on-campus and
planning processes are important to off-campus, should be assessed
support the timely delivery of this form against the policy measures of this
of housing. In comparison with other position statement, as well as the local
jurisdictions, WA currently has a relatively planning framework.
limited supply of multi storey PBSA. ii. Other built form proposals, such as
detached or grouped dwelling(s),
Clearer policy direction will assist in
will primarily be guided by the
improving consistency in decision-making,
relevant provisions in the R-Codes,
supporting investment certainty and
as considered appropriate by the
facilitating more streamlined approval
decision maker.
pathways.

Position Statement
2
Purpose-built student accommodation
March 2026
The position statement may also assist 4. Policy objectives 5. Policy measures 5.2 Statutory planning
decision makers in determining a
development application where the local The policy objectives of this position 5.1 Strategic planning 5.2.1 Local Planning Schemes
planning framework does not provide statement are to:
Local planning schemes should align with
specific guidance on PBSA. In view of a. elevate consideration of multi-storey 5.1.1 Local Planning Strategies the local planning strategy, to facilitate the
the diverse characteristics of urban areas PBSA in strategic planning. Where higher educational institutions exist streamlined delivery of multi-storey PBSA.
across Western Australia, discretion may b. ensure multi-storey PBSA are within or adjacent to a local government When considering zoning, PBSA may be
be required when applying the policy appropriately located, high-quality, area, a local planning strategy should located within higher density residential
measures within this position statement or respond to local character (current consider, evaluate and provide for future zones, mixed use and commercial/centre
from the R Codes when assessing PBSA. and future) and are designed to multi-storey PBSA by incorporating a type zones, in line with the local strategic
deliver safe and functional living dedicated section within the Community, planning framework (section 5.1).
Urban Growth and Settlement section of
environments that actively support
5.2.2 Land use definition
the local planning strategy that details::
student health and wellbeing.
While PBSA is designed around student
c. provide clear, outcomes-based a. existing and proposed supply of
needs and can be provided in a variety
planning guidance for decision- student accommodation, including
of built forms, multi-storey PBSA offers
makers by identifying the desired the identification of any specific sites
modern, well-located accommodation,
design quality outcomes to ensure and/ or locations, where appropriate
with a mix of self-contained and shared
consistent and efficient assessment of b. medium to long-term demand for
living options. Developments include
multi-storey PBSA proposals. student accommodation along with
shared amenities and communal spaces
associated targets (engage with
that foster social interaction and a sense of
educational institutions and PBSA
community. These developments may be
providers)
located off-campus and open to students
c. an analysis of the gaps in the provision from any institution, or on-campus where
of student accommodation accommodation is guided by an education
d. opportunities and constraints to provider’s masterplan and closely
facilitate future provision of multi- integrated with campus life.
storey PBSA In assessing multi-storey PBSA, decision
e. implications for the local planning makers have been required to determine
scheme or other local government the most appropriate land use definition
planning instruments to facilitate for this form of accommodation. Proposals
supply, where appropriate. have been assessed under a variety of
existing local planning scheme definitions,
The level of detail required in a local
or considered as a ‘Residential Building’, or
planning strategy should reflect the
as a ‘use not listed’.
significance of PBSA to the local
community and economy.

Position Statement
3
Purpose-built student accommodation
March 2026
However, to remove ambiguity and to provides shared communal facilities, 5.3.1 Location 5.3.2 Context and character
provide greater certainty, a new interim and the accommodation may not be
Outcomes Outcomes
land use definition is proposed: self-contained. Consequently, multi-
storey PBSA does not meet the ‘multiple 1. The development is located within 1. The design is contextually responsive
Purpose-built student accommodation
dwellings’ definition. a walkable catchment of a tertiary to the existing and intended future
means a purpose-built facility whose
educational institution/campus; or character of the locality and, where
predominant purpose is to accommodate While the following section outlines
appropriate, demonstrates cultural
students while studying at a tertiary assessment guidance for built form 2. Is integrated into an Activity Centre
awareness that integrates the values of
education facility, and staff of a tertiary and management, proposals also need (District Centre or larger) or mixed-use
Country.
education facility or visiting staff to a to address the relevant Local Planning precinct, within a walkable catchment
tertiary education facility: Scheme and Local Planning Policy of a high frequency public transport 2. The design contributes positively to
provisions that pertain to the specific site. route to a tertiary educational the public realm.
(a) that is designed and managed to
institution/campus; and
facilitate the predominant purpose; The following outcomes have been drawn Achieving the outcomes
3. Is located with access to a range of
(b) that typically provides students with from some of the design principles under a. The design should demonstrate how
commercial, retail, entertainment and
a principal place of residence for 3 State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of the the built form, and public realm will
social facilities.
months or more; and Built Environment (SPP 7.0), ensuring good support and positively contribute
(c) that may have shared facilities, such as design is leveraged to deliver measurable Achieving the outcomes to the existing and intended future
results for PBSA. Other outcomes in this
a communal living room, kitchen and The development should demonstrate: character and streetscape quality
section, reflect specific design or functional
amenities. through a detailed context and
aspects of multi-storey PBSA development a. The distance to and accessibility of the
character study.
proposals. nearest tertiary institution/campus;
5.3 Development assessment b. The detailed context and character
and
The following section is structured to study should be commensurate
The outcomes-based approach outlined distinguish between: b. The availability, route frequency and with the scale of development
in this section, is intended to guide the walkable access to public transport and, where appropriate, shaped by
Outcomes - the high-level outcomes that
planning, design and assessment of multi- services; and culturally responsive and meaningful
should be met; and
storey PBSA for development assessment. c. The presence of active transport engagement with Traditional Owners
They inform landowners, proponents, Achieving the outcomes - provides infrastructure, including footpaths, to inform a sensitive, site-specific
designers, operators and decision makers examples of how to achieve the outcome, cycling routes and end of trip facilities; response to its setting, existing
of the outcomes that should be achieved, either through the information submitted and landscape and topography.
rather than prescribing specific criteria. with the application, through design
d. the proximity to essential community, c. An operational management plan
features or through measures outlined in
It should be noted that the R-Codes retail, recreational and health services. should be submitted that sets out how
an operational management plan.
prescribe standards for permanent the development will be managed
residential development. Multi-storey and operated to avoid adverse
PBSA sits outside this framework because impacts on surrounding properties
it provides accommodation for temporary (e.g., noise, waste, tenancy arrivals/
occupants, the building configuration departures, managing complaints).

Position Statement
4
Purpose-built student accommodation
March 2026
5.3.3 Landscape quality c. Landscape design is developed in intended), topography, street pattern, b. Habitable rooms are designed
parallel with the building design to and views, vistas and landmarks, to provide access to natural light
Outcomes
provide a hierarchy of functional reinforcing local identity. and ventilation to support student
1. The design supports the retention of outdoor spaces, including integrated comfort. The design should optimise
b. The design should demonstrate how
significant existing vegetation and shade, seating, and varied planting. passive opportunities as the primary
the building’s siting and public realm
the provision of deep soil zones that response, and not rely solely on
d. Evidence of site-wide WSUD is interface respond to solar orientation,
sustain large-scale canopy trees. mechanical ventilation or artificial
provided, including the use of enhance the pedestrian environment
2. Sustainable landscaping is integrated permeable treatments, features at street level, and provide compatible lighting except where necessary by
as ‘essential infrastructure’ to increase such as rain gardens, and bioswales transitions to neighbouring properties specific site constraints.
the urban tree canopy, mitigate urban to reduce runoff and enhance and existing access networks. c. Building construction and internal
heat, and support local biodiversity. biodiversity. layouts minimize noise transfer
c. Building layout should balance passive
3. High-quality outdoor landscaped e. Submission of an Arboriculture surveillance, internal amenity, and and disturbance from services,
environments are created that provide Assessment and Deep Soil Area solar access, overshadowing/solar shared spaces, and external vehicle
respite, foster social interaction, and calculations and diagram to ensure the analysis and CPTED principles. movements.
enhance the daily life of residents. provision of sufficient, unencumbered, d. A variety of accessible shared spaces
5.3.5 Functionality and build quality
4. The design integrates a holistic soil volumes to support both existing are integrated within the building to
approach to Water Sensitive Urban and future tree canopy. Outcomes facilitate social interaction and foster a
Design (WSUD) to manage stormwater sense of community.
5.3.4 Built form and scale 1. The design delivers functional, high-
and improve local groundwater e. The mix of bedroom types should
quality private living spaces, with
recharge. Outcomes respond to local market conditions
optimised access to natural light and
and student demand, providing a
Achieving the outcomes 1. The development embodies good effective ventilation.
range of options that support the
urban design, as guided by the design
2. Well-designed communal facilities
a. On site tree retention should inform long-term viability of the development
principles in State Planning Policy 7.0
are achieved that support social
the proposed design, wherever while meeting the needs of different
Design of the Built Environment.
interaction, a sense of community and
possible. students.
2. Context-responsive bulk, mass and comfortable day-today living.
b. A landscape plan is provided
height, and high-quality layout and 3. The development provides a diverse 5.3.6 Sustainability
that enhances tree canopy cover
amenity is achieved, consistent with
consistent with Perth and Peel Urban mix of accommodation types, that are Outcomes
the local planning framework.
responsive to market demand and the
Greening Strategy, where applicable),
1. The design delivers high performance
prioritising endemic and drought- Achieving the outcomes local context.
environmental outcomes that meet
tolerant species to optimise solar a. Informed by a context and character Achieving the outcomes or exceed recognised industry
access, reduce localised heat island
study, the bulk, mass and height benchmarks.
a. Accommodation is designed for
effects and support local biodiversity.
should respond to adjacent and
everyday utility, ensuring adequate 2. Climate-resilient design is achieved,
nearby built form (existing and
space for sleeping, study, and storage, optimising energy efficiency and
with functional bathroom and kitchen occupant comfort through orientation
layouts, where applicable. and thermal performance.

Position Statement
5
Purpose-built student accommodation
March 2026
3. Integrated waste systems are in place 3. Efficient and functional essential e. Storage is provided in a convenient, 2. Management and operation support
that are easy for residents to use while services are provided, with deliveries secure and weather protected the ongoing use and mitigates any
maximising resource recovery collected securely and safely and location. adverse effects on the surrounding
appropriate storage fully in place. locality.
Achieving the outcomes 5.3.8 Legibility
Achieving the outcomes Achieving the outcomes
a. Submission of a sustainability Outcomes
strategy, commensurate with the a. The design should demonstrate a. An operational management plan
1. The accommodation’s main entrances
scale of development, that outlines that the accommodation balances should be submitted to provide
and movement networks are readily
the lifecycle benefits of the chosen visual privacy with the opportunity to evidence of design elements that
identifiable, providing clear, universally
sustainability features. maximise visual amenity. activate street frontages together
accessible physical and visual links to
with strategies for social engagement,
b. Provision of a Design Report, including b. The design should demonstrate
the public realm.
event activation, and community
thermal modeling or sunlight/ consideration of window placement,
2. Private and public areas are clearly partnerships.
ventilation diagrams, demonstrating building separation and setback
distinguished, ensuring functional
how building orientation, thermal distances, and the relationship b. An operational management plan
and safe separation of pedestrian and
mass, and natural ventilation are between rooms and nearby buildings should be submitted that outlines
vehicular traffic.
used to maintain comfortable indoor minimise overlooking to consider measures for mitigating potential
environments. reasonable privacy for students and Achieving the outcome/s amenity impacts (e.g. noise, waste,
neighbours. traffic, security).
c. Submission of a Waste Management
a. The development successfully
Plan that demonstrates how the c. The design should consider the
demonstrates how the design 5.3.10 Safety & Wellbeing
physical design, including the location of, and demonstrate that
provides clear and legible site
placement of chutes, sorting rooms, various communal spaces (e.g., quiet Outcomes
planning including clearly articulated
and collection points, encourages zones, active spaces, indoor/outdoor)
entrances and intuitive movement for 1. A high standard of physical safety and
residents to separate waste, are provided, and that any impacts
pedestrians, cyclists and other modes security is provided for all students
recyclables and organics with minimal between co-located spaces and
of transport. and visitors.
effort. accommodation is mitigated.
b. To ensure safe use and operation, the 2. The accommodation is resilient
d. Measures for the operation and
5.3.7 Amenity proposal should reduce reliance on and supports students’ health and
security of common areas, storage
signage and demonstrate how the wellbeing, particularly during periods
Outcomes facilities, designated collection points
site layout clearly differentiates private of isolation or restricted movement.
for mail/deliveries, and laundry
1. The design balances amenity and access points (e.g., student parking/
facilities should be detailed in the Achieving the outcomes
visual privacy. servicing) from the public realm.
operational management plan, which
a. An operational management plan
2. Communal areas are high-quality,
may, dependent on scale, include a 5.3.9 Community
should be submitted that outlines
universally accessible, and well-
noise management plan to mitigate
proportioned to meet the diverse Outcomes specific risk mitigation strategies,
acoustic impacts on the surrounding
CPTED analysis, and proposed security
social, recreational, and study needs of
locality. 1. The design and operation facilitate
measures.
students, including a range of intimate
social interaction and support a
to large spaces.
diverse range of students.

Position Statement
6
Purpose-built student accommodation
March 2026
b. An operational management plan b. Bicycle parking is provided in a b. Incorporate structural and spatial
should be submitted that specifies the convenient, secure and weather elements that support future changes
essential services, remote support, and protected location and includes a in use, technology, or operational
built form features that support the shared basic repair station. needs, where feasible.
health and wellbeing of the students.
c. Electric charging infrastructure is c. Design may facilitate future adaptation
incorporated to support vehicles and and/or, if required, consideration of
5.3.11 Movement and access
other small personal mobility devices. sustainable disassembly at end of life,
Outcomes enabling components to be reused
d. Servicing access is designed to
and reducing demolition waste.
1. Onsite parking, charging infrastructure accommodate vehicles required for
and service access are designed to building maintenance, deliveries and d. Submission of an operational
meet operational needs. other operational functions. management plan when the operator
proposes temporary tenancy
2. The development prioritises safe and e. Waste collection areas are located and
arrangements during shutdown
convenient movement of pedestrians designed to ensure safe, convenient
periods to allow for flexible occupancy.
and cyclists, while vehicle and service use for students and practical access
access is effectively managed to for waste operators.
meet operational needs and avoid
f. Submission of a traffic impact
significant impacts on the local
statement (TIS) or traffic impact
community.
assessment (TIA) to ensure that
3. Parking provision responds any traffic and parking movements
to the specific context of the generated by the development can be
development, ensuring alignment managed.
with demonstrated demand and the
5.3.12 Adaptive reuse
availability of alternative transport
options. Outcomes
Achieving the outcomes 1. The development incorporates
adaptive building design and
a. Where an evidence based rationale
operational flexibility, enabling it to
demonstrates that carparking demand
accommodate future needs where
can be met through alternative
appropriate and practicable
transport options, such as convenient
access to public transport, educational Achieving the outcomes
facilities, shops or local services, the
a. Design buildings with flexible
provision of on-site carparking may
layouts, adaptable communal areas,
not be required, or minimal carparking
and service systems that could be
provision may be supported.
reconfigured or upgraded over time,
where appropriate and practical.