Residential Design Codes
Volume 1
2026

The Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage © State of Western Australia
acknowledges the traditional owners and custodians of this
Published by the Western Australian Planning Commission
land. We pay our respect to Elders past and present, their
descendants who are with us today, and those who will Gordon Stephenson House
follow in their footsteps.
140 William Street Perth WA 6000
Locked Bag 2506 Perth WA 6001
Disclaimer
Version 3 published 10 April 2026
This document has been produced by the Department
website: www.wa.gov.au/dplh
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the tel: 08 6551 8002
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for any
fax: 08 6551 9001
damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result of
action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect of National Relay Service: 13 36 77
any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before
applying the information contained in this document to This document is available in alternative formats on
particular circumstances. application to the Department of Planning, Lands and
Heritage Communications branch at media@dplh.wa.gov.au.
Photo credits
Cover-Gresley Monk additions (Dion Robeson)
Part B-Dale Alcock (D-Max Photography)
Part C-MJA Studio (Jack Lovel Photography)
Part D-Land DevelopmentWA

About this document
Planning reform Outcomes-based planning Who is this design code for?
Western Australia is experiencing a shifting planning and The R-Codes strongly advocate contextual and site- The R-Codes provide planning and design provisions for
development landscape, influenced by new disruptive specific development solutions. To facilitate good design residential development across Western Australia. These
technologies, changes to our economy, and a diverse outcomes, the R-Codes Volume 1 provides two pathways for provisions have been provided to assist in the following ways:
population with different needs and expectations. A development assessment and determination.
- Guide developers, urban planners, urban designers,
streamlined, contemporary and fit-for-purpose planning
Applications for development approval need to demonstrate architects, landscape architects, builders and other
system that meets the varying needs of our vast State is
that the proposal achieves the objectives of the R-Codes professionals when designing housing developments and
critical for the delivery of quality housing for connected,
Volume 1 and the requirements of each design element preparing an application for development approval.
vibrant and affordable communities, both now and in the
future. through either of the following pathways: - Assist decision-makers and planning professionals
1. Deemed-to-comply – deemed-to-comply provisions in local and State government with assessment of
The Action Plan for Planning Reform elevates the requirement provide a straightforward means for the development development proposals and in implementing strategic
for well-designed residential development across the State proposal to demonstrate that it satisfies the objectives planning in the form of local policy and design guidance.
and the review and update of Residential Design Codes
and design principles of the R-Codes. They outline the - Support communities by raising awareness of the
Volume 1 (R-Codes Volume 1) supports this goal.
expected development standards that should be met principles of good design and by promoting quality
through this pathway. housing designs that will make a positive contribution to
About good design
local neighbourhoods.
2. Design principle – the design principles pathway offers
Good design is not a subjective idea; it can be defined an alternative merit-based approach when one or more
R-Codes structure
and measured. Notions of design quality extend beyond of the deemed-to-comply provisions are not satisfied.
taste, style and appearance to encompass functionality, This allows for innovative design responses that may be The R-Codes consist of two volumes.
sustainability, response to context, structural integrity, more context and site responsive. Where a deemed-to-
flexibility in use, and cost efficiency, both during construction comply provision is not met, the proponent should provide
and over the life of the building. Most importantly, good sufficient justification to demonstrate how they have met
design outcomes improve the urban environment, benefit or exceeded the requirements of the relevant design
local communities and leave a positive legacy for future principle(s) when this pathway is pursued.
generations.1
To foster good design outcomes, proponents are encouraged
Good design endeavours to reconcile multiple concurrent to access available opportunities for independent design
and often competing objectives and outcomes that vary review consistent with State Planning Policy 7.0 – Design of
according to the circumstances of each site and project. A the Built Environment (SPP 7.0) and the Design Review Guide.
rigorous, considered and contextual design process should This can be particularly helpful for more complex applications
prioritise these competing objectives to develop a cohesive, and applications pursuing a merit-based, design principle
site-responsive design. Undertaking this process typically approvals pathway, where the requirements of the code can
creates better performing buildings and better outcomes for be met in a variety of ways.
community.
The Residential Design Codes Volume 1 Explanatory
1 State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of the Built Environment (SPP 7.0) Guidelines (Explanatory Guidelines) have also been provided
to explain and assist the interpretation and application of
the R-Codes, providing additional guidance to applicants,
designers, decision-makers and the community.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 I

About this document
(cont.)
Document structure
There are four parts to the R-Codes Volume 1 (this document).
PART A – OPERATION OF CODE PART C
Part A establishes the purpose, application and operation of the R-Codes Volume 1 and Part C applies to all single houses R50 and above, grouped
consists of the following sections: dwellings in areas coded R30 and above, and multiple
dwellings in areas coded R30 to R60.
Section 1.0 Preliminary
The provisions and related figures, tables and diagrams, are
Contains the administrative provisions and statutory framework, including the citation,
captured in three sections:
general objectives of the code, and its application in relation to residential development.
1.0 The Garden
Section 2.0 Development application and decision-making process
2.0 The Building
Outlines the requirements for applications and the process for assessment and
3.0 Neighbourliness
determination of development proposals. This section also explains when consultation with
neighbours may be required and the applicable process. Objectives are included at the beginning of each of these
sections to guide development proposals and assessment.
Section 3.0 Local planning framework
These three sections are further divided into design elements
Explains how the provisions of the code interact with local planning frameworks. This that include the design principle and deemed-to-comply
includes which local planning instruments can modify R-Code provisions to achieve context pathways.
and site-responsive development outcomes.
The fourth and fifth temporary sections provides substituted
Part B deemed-to-comply provisions for certain single house
development applications in relation to design elements in
Part B applies to all single houses R40 and below, grouped dwellings R25 and below, and The Garden, The Building and Neighbourliness.
multiple dwellings in areas coded R10-R25.
The provisions for Part B and related figures, tables and diagrams, are captured in five
PART D – LAND
sections:
Part D applies to single houses and grouped dwellings (all
density codings), and multiple dwellings in areas coded R10
to R60.
This part sets out the site area requirements and dwelling
yield for development in Part B and Part C and includes
5.1 Context 5.4 Building design objectives to guide subdivision proposals and assessment,
along with design principle and deemed-to-comply
5.2 Streetscape 5.5 Special purpose dwellings
pathways.
5.3 Site planning and design
Objectives are included at the beginning of each of these sections to guide development APPENDICES
proposals and assessment. These five sections are further divided into design elements that
The appendices, which form part of the statutory provisions
include the design principle and deemed-to-comply pathways.
of the R-Codes Volume 1, consists of definitions, context and
site analysis and application requirements.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 II

About this document
(cont.)
Graphic layout
Throughout this document, words written in bold print have a
corresponding definition listed in A1 Definitions.
The R-Codes Volume 1 applies a two-column format. The
left-hand column provides the element design principles.
The right-hand column provides the deemed-to-comply
provisions.
Navigation bar
Sub-section
Design element X.x
Design principles
Deemed-to-comply provisions
Tables
Figures
Related elements
Notes
- Figures in Part B are located at the end of the chapter
- Related elements are only applicable to Part C
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 III

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Contents
ABOUT THIS DOCUMENT PART A: OPERATION OF THE CODE
1.0 PRELIMINARY
Planning reform I
1.1 Citation 2
About good design I
1.2 Purpose of the R-Codes 2
Outcomes-based planning I
1.3 General objectives of the R-Codes 2
Who is this design code for? I
1.4 Application of the R-Codes 2
R-Codes structure I
1.5 Explanatory Guidelines 3
Document structure II
Graphic layout III
2.0 DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION AND
DECISION-MAKING PROCESS
2.1 R-Codes development application process 4
2.2 Assessment and determination process 5
under the R-Codes
2.3 Consultation 6
3.0 LOCAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK
3.1 Function of local planning frameworks 7
3.2 Ability of local planning frameworks to 7
modify R-Codes
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 IV

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Contents
PART B 5.4 BUILDING DESIGN FIGURES SERIES
5.1 CONTEXT 5.4.1 Visual privacy 33 2 Street setbacks 46
5.1.1 Site area 12 5.4.2 Solar access for adjoining sites 34 3 Wall height for lot boundary setbacks 49
5.1.2 Street setback 13 5.4.3 Outbuildings 35 4 Wall length for lot boundary setbacks 51
5.1.3 Lot boundary setback 14 5.4.4 External fixtures, utilities and facilities 36 5 Lot boundary walls 53
5.1.4 Open space 16 6 Open space 54
5.1.5 Communal open space 16 5.5 SPECIAL PURPOSE DWELLING 7 Building height 55
5.1.6 Building height 17 5.5.1 Ancillary dwellings 38 8 Garages and carports 56
5.5.2 Aged or dependent persons’ dwellings 39 9 Sight lines 57
5.2 STREETSCAPE 5.5.3 Single bedroom dwellings 40 10 Privacy 58
5.2.1 Setback of carports and garages 19 5.5.4 Accessible dwellings 41 11 Overshadowing 60
5.2.2 Garage width 20 5.5.5 Small dwellings 42 12 Fences 61
13 Outdoor living areas 62
5.2.3 Street surveillance 20
TABLES
5.2.4 Street walls and fences 21
5.2.5 Sightlines 21 Table B – Primary controls for all single house(s) in 43
areas coded R40 and below, grouped dwellings in
5.2.6 Appearance of retained dwelling 22
areas coded R25 and below; and multiple dwellings
in areas coded R10 to R25.
5.3 SITE PLANNING AND DESIGN
Table 2a - Boundary setbacks – walls with no major 44
5.3.1 Outdoor living areas 24
openings
5.3.2 Landscaping 25
Table 2b - Boundary setbacks – walls with major 44
5.3.3 Parking 26 openings
5.3.4 Design of car parking spaces 27 Table 3 - Maximum building heights 45
5.3.5 Vehicular access 28
5.3.6 Pedestrian access 29
5.3.7 Site works 30
5.3.8 Retaining walls 30
5.3.9 Stormwater management 31
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 V

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Contents
(cont.)
PART C 3.0 NEIGHBOURLINESS PART D: LAND
1.0 THE GARDEN BUILT FORM AND CHARACTER 1.0 LAND
1.1 Private open space 65 3.1 Site cover 89 1.1 Site area
1.2 Trees and landscaping 67 3.2 Building height 90
1.3 Communal open space 70 3.3 Street setbacks 91 TABLES
1.4 Water management and conservation 71 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks 93 Table D – Site area requirement 118
3.5 Site works and retaining walls 97
2.0 THE BUILDING
3.6 Streetscape 98
APPENDICES
INDOOR AMENITY 3.7 Access 100
2.1 Size and layout of dwellings 73 3.8 Retaining existing dwellings 104 A1 Definitions 121
2.2 Solar access and natural ventilation 76 COMMUNITY A2 Context and site analysis 127
FUNCTION 3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites 105 A3 Application documentation 128
3.10 Visual privacy 107 A4 Universal design requirements 131
2.3 Parking 78
2.4 Waste management 81
2.5 Utilities 82
2.6 Outbuildings 83
HOUSING DIVERSITY
2.7 Universal design 84
2.8 Ancillary dwellings 85
2.9 Small dwellings 86
2.10 Housing on lots less than 100m2 86
TABLES
Table C – Primary controls 111
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 VI

PART A
Operation of Code
1.0 PRELIMINARY 2
2.0 DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESS 4
3.0 LOCAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK 7
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 1

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Preliminary | 2.0 Development application and decision-making process | 3.0 Local planning framework
1.0 Preliminary
1.1 Citation 1.3 General objectives of the R-Codes 1.4 Application of the R-Codes
This Planning Code is made under Part 3A of the Planning The general objectives of the R-Codes are: The R-Codes applies to all residential development
and Development Act 2005 and is cited as Residential Design throughout Western Australia.
Codes Volume 1 (R-Codes Volume 1). Residential development objectives
The R-Codes are divided into two volumes (refer Table 1.4a).
- to facilitate quality residential development that R-Codes Volume 1 applies to all single house and grouped
1.2 Purpose of the R-Codes provides occupants with high amenity and liveable dwelling developments; and multiple dwelling development
housing for an enhanced quality of life; in areas coded R10-R60. R-Codes Volume 2 applies to
The purpose of the R-Codes is to provide a comprehensive
- to promote a range of housing types that provide multiple dwelling (apartment) developments in areas coded
basis for the guidance and control of residential
residents with choice, including affordable options; R80 and above and R-AC. Any dwellings in a mixed use
development throughout Western Australia. development are considered to be multiple dwellings and the
- to encourage housing that responds to local context and
relevant volume applies.
contributes to the desired streetscape, precinct and
neighbourhood character;
- to facilitate residential development that is
environmentally, economically and socially sustainable;
Table 1.4a Application of the R-Codes development
and
standards
- to encourage house designs that are respectful and
responsive to local heritage and cultural values. Multiple
Dwellings
Planning, governance and development process objectives
(including
- to facilitate residential development that is Residential Design Single Grouped
dwelling
appropriately designed for the intended residential Codes Houses Dwellings
components
purpose, land tenure, density, place context and scheme
objectives; of mixed use
developments)
- to encourage residential design that is responsive to the
development site, inclusive of its location, size geometry Volume 1 Part B R40 and R25 and R10 to R25
and features; below below
- to allow variety and diversity as appropriate where it Part C R50 and R30 and R30 to R60
can be demonstrated this better reflects the context or above; above;
scheme objectives; R100-SL; R100-SL;
- to allow for appropriate modifications to, and R-AC R-AC
augmentation of R-Codes provisions through local Volume 2 NA NA R80 and above;
planning frameworks; R-AC
- to provide certainty in timely assessment and
determination of proposals; and
- to provide an assessment framework that supports
consistent application of standards and decision-making
between jurisdictions.
In assessing and determining proposals for residential
development, the decision-maker shall have regard to the
above general objectives, and any relevant objectives of the
relevant scheme.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 2

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Preliminary | 2.0 Development application and decision-making process | 3.0 Local planning framework
1.0 Preliminary
(cont.)
R-Codes Volume 1 is comprised of four parts. 1.5 Explanatory Guidelines
Part A outlines the application and decision-making The Western Australian Planning Commission (WAPC) may
processes for residential development and the prepare more detailed Explanatory Guidelines on the matters
modifications that can be made to the provisions of the
addressed in the R-Codes Volume 1, in consultation with
R-Codes through local planning frameworks. local government and relevant stakeholders, to meet the
Part B includes provisions applicable to single houses objectives of the R-Codes Volume 1 and, if prepared, these
in areas coded R40 and below, grouped dwellings and should be considered in the determination of proposals.
multiple dwellings (including the dwelling component of The Explanatory Guidelines, which may be amended from
mixed use development) in areas coded R25 and below. time to time, provide design and assessment guidance to
Part C includes provisions applicable to single houses in assist interpretation and assessment of proposals against the
areas coded R50 and above, R100-SL and R-AC, grouped design principles and deemed-to-comply provisions of the
dwellings in areas coded R30 and above, R100-SL and R-Codes Volume 1 as well as guidance for preparing local
R-AC; and multiple dwellings (including the dwelling planning frameworks.
component of mixed use development) in areas coded
R30 to R60 inclusive.
Part D provides the site area requirements for all
residential development.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 3

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Preliminary | 2.0 Development application and decision-making process | 3.0 Local planning framework
2.0 Development application and decision-making process
2.1 R-Codes development application process
The following information provides a summary of when a Proponent prepares an appropriate proposal for the site
development application is required. It is recommended addressin p g l r a e n l n e i v n a g n f t r a R m -C e o w d o e r s k V re o q l. u 1, i r s e c m he e m nt e s and local
proponents of developments consult with the relevant
decision-maker to establish the application and procedural
requirements that apply to the specific development proposal
in the applicable jurisdiction. Proponent liaises with decision-maker (if necessary)
The R-Codes Volume 1 approval process is illustrated in the
process flowchart of Figure 2.1. This process flowchart has
been designed as a guide for all decision-makers, developers A proposal for residential development for a particular
site prepared to meet the requirements of the
and proponents using R-Codes Volume 1. R-Codes Vol. 1
2.1.1 When a development application is required
A development application1 is required where required under Proposal addresses one or more Proposal meets deemed-to-comply provisions a scheme. design principles of the R-Codes Vol. 1 of the R-Codes Vol. 1 and the Scheme
Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development (Local Planning
Schemes) Regulations 2015 (the Regulations) exempts Requires judgement of merit No Yes
certain works from requiring a development application and Development approval required1
development approval (refer cl. 61, part 7 of Schedule 2).
Where a development application is required, the application
Application submitted All other
shall be lodged with the relevant decision-maker for Onus on applicant to provide written residential Single house1 assessment and determination. support of proposal to show how development all objectives and design principles
are met for any matters that are not
deemed-to-comply
1 Refer cl. 60 and 61 of part 7 in Schedule 2 of the Regulations.
Consultation (if required) ap D p e ro v v e a lo l p re m q e u n ir t e d D a e p r v p e e r q o lo u v p i a re m l d n e o n t t
Assess proposal against its merits
and relevant design principles
No Yes
Refusal Should only occur where a proposal
does not meet the deemed-to-comply Development approval Proceed to
provisions or design principles and where granted building permit the applicant is not able to modify the
design (liaison recommended)
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 4
ESAHP
NGISED
ESAHP
NOITACILPPA
ESAHP
NOISICED
deraperp
si
etis
eht
rof
lasoporp
etairporppa
nA
noitacilppa
sredisnoc
rekam-noisiceD
Proponent prepares an appropriate proposal for the site
addressing relevant R-Codes Vol. 1, scheme and local
planning framework requirements
Proponent liaises with decision-maker (if necessary)
A proposal for residential development for a particular
site prepared to meet the requirements of the
R-Codes Vol. 1
Proposal addresses one or more Proposal meets deemed-to-comply provisions
design principles of the R-Codes Vol. 1 of the R-Codes Vol. 1 and the Scheme
Requires judgement of merit No Yes
Development approval required1
Application submitted All other Onus on applicant to provide written residential Single house1 support of proposal to show how development
all objectives and design principles
are met for any matters that are not
deemed-to-comply
Development Consultation (if required) Development approval not approval required required
Assess proposal against its merits and relevant design principles
No Yes
Refusal Notes
Should only occur where a proposal 1 A scheme may require development
does not meet the deemed-to-comply Development approval Proceed to a of p t p h r e o v re a q l f u o ir r e a m s e in n g ts le o h f o th u e s e R - ir C re o s d p e e s c tive
provisions or design principles and where granted building permit Volume 1.
the applicant is not able to modify the This flowchart does not illustrate the
design (liaison recommended) determination review process possible
via the State Administrative Tribunal.
Figure 2.1 R-Codes Volume 1 approval process
ESAHP
NGISED
ESAHP
NOITACILPPA
ESAHP
NOISICED
deraperp
si
etis
eht
rof
lasoporp
etairporppa
nA
noitacilppa
sredisnoc
rekam-noisiceD
Notes
1 A scheme may require development
approval for a single house irrespective
of the requirements of the R-Codes Volume 1.
This flowchart does not illustrate the
determination review process possible
via the State Administrative Tribunal.

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Preliminary | 2.0 Development application and decision-making process | 3.0 Local planning framework
2.0 Development application and decision-making process
(cont.)
2.1.2 Design development process and design review 2.1.3 Development application requirements Judgement of merit is exercised by the decision-maker only
Prior to lodging the development application with the All applications for development approval must provide for the specific element of a proposal that does not satisfy
decision-maker, it is recommended proponents undertake a the information required by the relevant scheme and the relevant deemed-to-comply provision. Where the
thorough design development process to progress the best as deemed to be necessary by the decision-maker to decision-maker is satisfied the design principle is met for
and most appropriate design response for the site. assess and determine the application (refer A3 Application that specific element, the corresponding deemed-to-comply
documentation for a list of items that may be required by provision(s) should not be applied.
A thorough design development process should entail the
decision-makers). The decision-maker may refuse to accept The Explanatory Guidelines may assist when undertaking a
following:
an application where the information provided is incomplete. merit-based assessment against the design principles of the
1. Context and site analysis R-Codes Volume 1.
Deemed-to-comply provisions prescribe the development
Context and site analysis early in the design process to standards that an application must satisfy in order to meet Where design review is available1, the recommendations and
understand the existing and intended character of the the objectives of the R-Codes and the requirements of each advice may inform the judgement of merit and exercise of
locality and the opportunities and constraints presented design element. Alternatively, proponents may lodge for a discretion.
by the site (refer A2 Context and site analysis for design principle(s) assessment against one or multiple design 1Refer to Design Review Guide
considerations that may be relevant at this stage). elements.
In making a determination on the suitability of an application,
2. Concept design The application must detail in writing where the proposed the decision-maker shall exercise judgement having regard
Concept design consisting of preliminary designs and development departs from a deemed-to-comply provision to:
sketches that address development opportunities and and give justification of how the proposal satisfies the
i. any relevant purpose, objectives and provisions of the
constraints, and explore different development options corresponding design principle and any relevant objectives
scheme;
for the site in accordance with the R-Codes and local and requirements of the local planning framework. Local
planning framework. neighbourhood character or site conditions may be relevant ii. any relevant objectives and provisions of the R-Codes;
in justifying why it may not be possible or desirable to satisfy
3. Pre-lodgement engagement a deemed-to-comply provision and how a proposal satisfies iii. the R-Codes Explanatory Guidelines;
Pre-lodgement engagement with the decision-maker the corresponding design principle. iv. a provision of a properly adopted local planning
(where this service is available) to resolve design instrument consistent with the R-Codes; and
issues and use feedback to improve and advance the 2.2 Assessment and determination
development proposal. v. orderly and proper planning.
process under the R-Codes
4. Design review The decision-maker shall not refuse to grant approval to an
application where the application satisfies the deemed-to-
Where available, design review in addition to pre- 2.2.1 Assessment comply provisions of the R-Codes Volume 1 and any relevant
lodgement engagement to obtain independent, In considering an application, a decision-maker shall have provision of the scheme and local planning framework.
expert advice on the design quality of the proposed regard to matters specified under cl. 67, part 9 in Schedule 2
development. Design review is particularly relevant to of the Regulations. Where an application does not satisfy a deemed-to-comply
larger scale, complex and innovative design proposals provision and is not consistent with the objectives, intent,
proposing a design principle pathway. Refer to Design The decision-maker shall not vary the minimum or average and corresponding design principle of the R-Codes and
Review Guide for further details. site area per dwelling requirements set out in Table D except any relevant provision of the scheme and local planning
as provided for in the R-Codes Volume 1 or the scheme. framework, the application should be refused by the
decision-maker.
2.2.2 Judging merit of proposal
Where an application does not meet a deemed-to-comply
provision(s) of the R-Codes Volume 1 and addresses a design
principle(s), the decision-maker is required to exercise
judgement and undertake a merit-based assessment to
determine the proposal.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 5

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Preliminary | 2.0 Development application and decision-making process | 3.0 Local planning framework
2.0 Development application and decision-making process
(cont.)
2.3 Consultation 2.3.4 Consultation approach 2.3.5 Consultation undertaken by proponent
If in the opinion of the decision-maker, adjoining owners For proposals requiring consultation with two or less adjoining
2.3.1 Consultation not required and occupiers are likely to be adversely impacted by the landowners, where consultation has been carried out
proposed development (in accordance with 2.3.2 and 2.3.3), satisfactorily (in the opinion of the decision-maker) by the
Where a development proposal is deemed-to-comply in the opportunity to view and comment on the proposal should proponent, and comments are provided which accompany
accordance with the R Codes Volume 1, it will not require be provided. the proposal, the decision-maker may consider and
advertising to adjoining owners and occupiers. determine the proposal without further consultation.
The owners and occupiers of properties likely to be adversely
2.3.2 Consultation required due to potential impact impacted, as identified by the decision-maker, shall be The decision-maker shall be satisfied that the information
notified in accordance with the requirements of cl. 64, part 8 provided and comments tendered are accurate and verified
Where an application is made for development approval
in Schedule 2 of the Regulations and invited to comment on subject to the consultation of the application information and
which presents:
that part of the proposed development that does not meet proof of posting by registered post provided to the decision-
i. a proposal against one or more design principles of the deemed-to-comply provisions of the R-Codes Volume 1. maker.
the R-Codes Volume 1; and
As a minimum, notified owners and occupiers should be 2.3.6 Amended plans
ii. there is the potential for the amenity of an adjacent
provided with information on:
property or the street to be impacted; Where a proposed development has previously been
i. how to view details of the proposal; advertised and amended plans are received post-advertising,
then there may be grounds for the decision-maker to notify
affected owners and occupiers of the proposal. ii. the site and general nature of the proposal; and the amended plans may be the subject of further consultation
(in accordance with the process outlined in section 2.3.4)
iii. reference to the design principles that the proposal
2.3.3 Consultation required by local planning framework where, in the opinion of the decision-maker, the proposed
is addressing and the supporting justification
development may have an adverse impact on the amenity of
Where the decision-maker is to judge the merits of a provided by the proponent.
an adjacent property or the streetscape.
development application as part of a design principle
The decision-maker, upon receipt of comments from owners
pathway assessment and: and occupiers of affected properties, should undertake a Where, in the opinion of the decision-maker, amended
i. the merits of the proposal are a matter of technical considered analysis of comments, balanced with technical plans reduce the impact of a proposed development and/
opinion; and expertise when exercising its judgement to determine the or where they address comments received from submitters,
proposal. re-advertising is not required.
ii. the decision-maker is satisfied that in its opinion the
proposed development will not result in a significant Where no response is received within the time specified from Notes:
impact on the amenity of the adjoining property or the date of notification, the decision-maker may proceed to 1. The same consultation procedures outlined in section 2.3.4
the street; determine the proposal on its merits and issue its decision. should be applied where amended plans are submitted prior
it is only necessary to seek comment from adjoining owners A summary of all comments received during the consultation to a decision-maker determining a proposed development
and occupiers where specifically required by the scheme or a period shall be provided to the proponent on request and, if that propose a material change to a development which
relevant local planning policy. so requested, a period of not more than 10 days, or a longer would warrant consultation under section 2.3.2.
period as agreed by the decision-maker, should be allowed 2. Decision-makers may have consultation requirements
within which the proponent may submit a response to the under their local planning framework that are additional or
comments prior to the decision-maker considering the different to those described above. It is recommended that
proposal. Submitters may elect to have their name and other discussions undertaken at pre-lodgement stage confirm the
personal details redacted from any submission provided to consultation requirements.
the proponent or published in any other form.
In making a determination, the decision-maker shall consider
any comments made during the consultation period and
the proponent’s response to the comments made on
the proposal (if any). The decision-maker should advise
submitters of its decision.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 6

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Preliminary | 2.0 Development application and decision-making process | 3.0 Local planning framework
3.0 Local planning framework
3.1 Function of local planning frameworks 3.2 Ability of local planning frameworks to modify R-Codes
Local planning frameworks may amend, replace and/or
3.2.1 Schemes
augment the deemed-to-comply provisions of the R-Codes
Volume 1. Decision-makers are encouraged to: Schemes may include clauses that amend, replace, augment
and/or exclude any provision of the R-Codes as provided for
i. maximise consistency of local planning frameworks in the Regulations.
with the R-Codes; and
ii. consider the need for settings that respond to a 3.2.2 Precinct structure plans
specific issue related to a locality or region, where this
A precinct structure plan may amend, replace and/or
is consistent with the element objectives and design
augment any deemed-to-comply provision of the R-Codes,
principles of the R-Codes.
and provide additional requirements relating to residential
When preparing and determining local planning frameworks, development in order to achieve the objectives and
proponents and decision-makers are to ensure that outcomes of State Planning Policy 7.2 Precinct Design
modifications to the R-Codes are: (SPP 7.2).
i. warranted due to a specific need identified by the
decision-maker related to that particular locality or
region;
ii. consistent with the relevant provisions of SPP 7.0
Design of the Built Environment;
iii. consistent with the general objectives of the R-Codes
Volume 1, as well as the section objectives and the
design principles of Part B and C (as applicable);
iv. able to be properly implemented and audited by
the decision-maker as part of the ongoing building
approval process; and
v. consistent with orderly and proper planning.
Local planning framework instruments that may amend,
replace and/or augment provisions of the R-Codes include
schemes, local planning policies, precinct structure plans
and local development plans. The provisions of the R-Codes
that may be amended, replaced and/or augmented by each
type of local planning instrument are identified in section 3.2.
The Explanatory Guidelines provide further detail for
additional considerations when modifying deemed-to-
comply provisions of the R-Codes through a local planning
framework.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 7

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Preliminary | 2.0 Development application and decision-making process | 3.0 Local planning framework
3.0 Local planning framework
(cont.)
3.2.3 Local planning policies
The R-Codes recognises that there are variations across the State in terms of local character, community requirements, climate and the environment. Local planning policies may be used to
facilitate contextually appropriate design within a local government area.
A local government may adopt a local planning policy that amends, replaces and/or augments a deemed-to-comply provision of the R-Codes Volume 1 in accordance with 3.2.3a and 3.2.3b,
subject to satisfying the criteria of 3.1(i)-(v).
3.2.3a Modification of the R-Codes through a local planning policy without WAPC approval
i. The following provisions of the R-Codes Volume 1 may be modified without WAPC approval: ii. In addition to (i), the following provisions of the R-Codes Volume 1 may be modified by local
governments located outside of the Perth and Peel regions without WAPC approval:
Part B Part C
5.1.2 Street setbacks – all clauses 1.2 Trees and landscaping – C1.2.5 Part B Part C
5.1.3 Lot boundary setbacks – C3.2-3.3 1.4 Water management and conservation – all 5.3.2 Landscaping – C2.2 1.2 Trees and landscaping – all clauses
clauses 2.1 Size and layout of dwellings – C2.1.9
5.1.6 Building height – all clauses
2.1 Size and layout of dwellings – C2.1.8 2.6 Outbuildings – all clauses
5.2.1 Setback of garages and carports – all
clauses 2.4 Waste management – all clauses
5.2.2 Garage width – all clauses 2.5 Utilities – all clauses
5.2.3 Street surveillance – all clauses 3.3 Street setbacks – all clauses iii. In addition to (i), the following provisions of the R-Codes Volume 1 may be modified without
WAPC approval for a heritage area:
5.2.4 Street walls and fences – all clauses 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks – C3.4.4 and C3.4.5
5.2.5 Sight lines – all clauses 3.5 Site works and retaining walls – all clauses Part B Part C
5.2.6 Appearance of retained dwelling – all 3.6 Streetscape – all clauses No additional 2.6 Outbuildings – all clauses
clauses 3.7 Access – C3.7.1 and C3.7.2 3.2 Building height – all clauses
5.3.5 Vehicular access – C5.1 3.8 Retaining existing dwellings – all clauses 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks C3.4.4 and C3.4.5
5.3.7 Site works – all clauses 3.7 Access – C3.7.7
5.4.3 Outbuildings – all clauses
5.4.4 External fixtures, utilities and facilities –
all clauses
5.5.2 Aged and dependent persons’
dwellings – all clauses
5.5.3 Single bedroom dwellings – all clauses
3.2.3b Modification of the R-Codes through a local planning policy with WAPC approval 3.2.3c Local housing objectives
Notwithstanding clause 3.2.3a, the local government may, with the approval of the WAPC, modify A local government may augment the design principles of the R-Codes Volume 1 by providing
any other deemed-to-comply provision of the R-Codes Volume 1. local housing objectives to guide judgements about the merits of proposals for any aspect of
residential development covered by this volume that does not meet the requirements, or is not
provided for, under the R-Codes Volume 1. Local housing objectives must be consistent with the
general objectives of the R-Codes Volume 1.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 8

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Preliminary | 2.0 Development application and decision-making process | 3.0 Local planning framework
3.0 Local planning framework
(cont.)
3.2.4 Local development plans
Local development plans guide and coordinate development outcomes that are appropriate to site context and identified development opportunities and constraints. As an instrument to
principally coordinate development within a defined area, local development plans should not be used for the sole purpose of amending or replacing a deemed-to-comply provision(s) of the
R-Codes.
A local government may adopt a local development plan that amends, replaces and/or augments a deemed-to-comply provision of the R-Codes Volume 1 in accordance with 3.2.4a and 3.2.4b,
subject to satisfying the criteria of 3.1(i)-(v).
3.2.4a Modification of the R-Codes through a local development plan without WAPC approval
i. The following provisions of the R-Codes Volume 1 may be modified without WAPC approval: ii. In addition to (i), the following provisions of the R-Codes Volume 1 may be modified by local
governments located outside of Perth and Peel regions without WAPC approval:
Part B Part C
5.1.2 Street setbacks – all clauses 1.4 Water management and conservation – all Part B Part C
5.1.3 Lot boundary setbacks – all clauses clauses No additional 2.1 Size and layout of dwellings – C2.1.9
5.1.6 Building height – all clauses 2.1 Size and layout of dwellings – C2.1.8
5.2.1 Setback of garages and carports – all 2.4 Waste management – all clauses
clauses 2.5 Utilities – all clauses
5.2.2 Garage width – all clauses 3.3 Street setbacks – all clauses
5.2.3 Street surveillance – all clauses 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks – All clauses
5.2.4 Street walls and fences – all clauses 3.5 Site works and retaining walls – all clauses
5.2.5 Sight lines – all clauses 3.6 Streetscape – C3.6.1, C3.6.2, C3.6.3, C3.6.4,
5.2.6 Appearance of retained dwelling – all C3.6.6, C3.6.7, C3.6.8, C3.6.9
clauses 3.7 Access – C3.7.1 and C3.7.2
5.3.5 Vehicular access – C5.1 3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites – all clauses
5.3.7 Site works – all clauses 3.10 Visual privacy – all clauses
5.4.3 Outbuildings – all clauses
5.4.4 External fixtures, utilities and facilities –
all clauses
5.5.2 Aged and dependent persons’
dwellings – all clauses
5.5.3 Single bedroom dwellings – all clauses
3.2.4b Modification of the R-Codes through a local development plan with WAPC approval
Notwithstanding clause 3.2.4a, the local government may, with the approval of the WAPC, modify
any other deemed-to-comply provision of the R-Codes Volume 1.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 9

PART B
5.1 CONTEXT 11
5.2 STREETSCAPE 18
5.3 SITE PLANNING AND DESIGN 23
5.4 BUILDING DESIGN 32
5.5 SPECIAL PURPOSE DWELLINGS 37
TABLES 43
FIGURES 46
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 10

5.1 CONTEXT
OBJECTIVES
A To ensure residential development
meets community expectations regarding
appearance, use and density.
B To ensure designs respond to the natural and
built features of the local context and, in the
case of precincts undergoing transition, the
desired future character as stated in the local
planning framework.
C To ensure adequate provision of sunlight and
natural ventilation for buildings and to limit
the impacts of building bulk, overlooking, and
overshadowing on adjoining properties.
D To ensure open space (private and communal)
is provided on site that:
• is landscaped to enhance
streetscapes;
• complements nearby buildings; and
• provides privacy, sunlight and
recreational opportunities.
E To ensure that design and development is
appropriately scaled, particularly in respect to
bulk and height, and is sympathetic to the scale
of the street and surrounding buildings, or in
precincts undergoing transition, development
achieves the desired future character
identified in local planning framework. 5.1.2 Street setback 5.1.5 Communal open space
5.1.3 Lot boundary setbacks 5.1.6 Building height
5.1.4 Open space
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 11

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.1.1 Site Area
Clause 5.1.1 Site Area deleted and replaced by Part D, 1.1 Site Area by amendment dated 10 April 2024.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 12

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.1.2 Street setback
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P2.1 Buildings set back from street boundaries an C2.1 Buildings, excluding carports, porches, balconies, C2.2 Buildings set back from the secondary street
appropriate distance to ensure they: verandahs, or equivalent, set back from the primary boundary in accordance with Table B.
street boundary:
• contribute to, and are consistent with, an C2.3 Buildings set back from the corner truncation
established streetscape; i. in accordance with Table B; boundary in accordance with the secondary street
• provide adequate privacy and open space for ii. corresponding to the average of the setback of setback in Table B.
dwellings; existing dwellings on each adjacent property C2.4 A porch, verandah, unenclosed balcony or the
• accommodate site planning requirements such fronting the same street; equivalent may (subject to the NCC) project forward
as parking, landscape and utilities; and iii. reduced by up to 50 per cent provided of the primary street setback line to a maximum
• allow safety clearances for easements for that the area of any building, including a of half the required primary street setback without
essential service corridors. garage encroaching into the setback area, is applying the compensating area of clause 5.2.1
compensated for by at least an equal area of C2.1(iii) (Refer Figure 2e).
P2.2 Buildings mass and form that:
open space that is located between the street
• uses design features to affect the size and scale setback line and a line drawn parallel to it at
of the building; twice the setback distance (refer Figure 2a and
• uses appropriate minor projections that do not
2c);
detract from the character of the streetscape; iv. in the case of areas coded R15 or higher, the
• minimises the proportion of the façade at street setback may be reduced to 2.5m, or 1.5m
ground level taken up by building services, to a porch, balcony, verandah or the equivalent
vehicle entries and parking supply, blank walls, (refer Figure 2e), where:
servicing infrastructure access and meters and • a grouped dwelling has its main frontage to
the like; and a secondary street; or
• positively contributes to the prevailing or future • a single house results from subdivision of
development context and streetscape as an original corner lot and has its frontage to
outlined in the local planning framework. the original secondary street; or
• a single house or grouped dwelling (where
that grouped dwelling is not adjacent to the
primary street), has its main frontage to a
communal street, right-of-way or shared
pedestrian or vehicle access way (Figure
2d); and
v. to provide for registered easements for
essential services.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 13

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.1.3 Lot boundary setbacks
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P3.1 Buildings set back from lot boundaries or adjacent C3.1 Buildings which are set back in accordance with iii. unenclosed areas accessible for use as
buildings on the same lot so as to: the following provisions, subject to any additional outdoor living areas, elevated 0.5m or more
measures in other elements of the R-Codes: above natural ground level, set back in
• reduce impacts of building bulk on adjoining accordance with Table 2b as though they have a
properties; i. buildings set back from lot boundaries in wall height of 2.4m above the floor level;
• provide adequate sunlight and ventilation to accordance with Table B and Tables 2a and 2b iv. separate single house, grouped or multiple
the building and open spaces on the site and (refer to Figure Series 3 and 4); dwelling buildings on the same lot, or facing
adjoining properties; and ii. for carports, patios, verandahs or equivalent portions of the same multiple dwelling building,
• minimise the extent of overlooking and structures, the lot boundary setbacks in Table B set back from each other as though there were a
resultant loss of privacy on adjoining properties. and Tables 2a and 2b may be reduced to nil to lot boundary between them;
the posts where the structure*:
P3.2 Buildings built up to boundaries (other than the v. minor projections such as a chimney, eaves
street boundary) where this: • is not more than 10m in length and 2.7m in overhang, or other architectural feature, not
height; projecting more than 0.75m into a setback area;
• makes more effective use of space for
• is located behind the primary street and
enhanced privacy for the occupant/s or
setback; and vi. the stated setback distances may be reduced
outdoor living areas;
• has eaves, gutters and roofs set back at by half the width of an adjoining right-of-way,
• does not compromise the design principle
least 450mm from the lot boundary. pedestrian access way, communal street
contained in clause 5.1.3 P3.1;
or battleaxe lot access leg, to a maximum
Note: Pillars and posts with a horizontal dimension of
• does not have any adverse impact on the reduction of 2m (refer to Figure 4f).
450mm by 450mm, or less, do not constitute a boundary
amenity of the adjoining property;
wall.
• ensures sunlight to major openings to
habitable rooms and outdoor living areas for Note: *There are separate building code requirements
adjoining properties is not restricted; and which may also apply.
• positively contributes to the prevailing or future
development context and streetscape as
outlined in the local planning framework.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 14

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.1.3 Lot boundary setbacks
(cont.)
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
C3.2 Boundary walls may be built behind the street C3.4 Where boundary walls and retaining walls are
setback (specified in Table B and in accordance proposed concurrently and the boundary wall is
with clauses 5.1.2 and 5.2.1), within the following located immediately above the retaining wall:
limits and subject to the overshadowing provisions
i. clause 5.3.7 does not apply; and
of clause 5.4.2 and Figure Series 11:
ii. the boundary wall height is to include the height
i. where the wall abuts an existing or of the retaining wall for the purpose of clause
simultaneously constructed boundary wall of 5.1.3 C3.2, with the exception of a retaining wall
equal or greater dimension; or approved through a plan of subdivision.
ii. in areas coded R20 and R25, walls not higher
Note: Retaining walls do not constitute boundary walls
than 3.5m, up to a maximum length of the
for the purpose of this clause. Setbacks for retaining walls
greater of 9m or one-third the length of the
are to be calculated in accordance with clause 5.3.7.
balance of the site boundary behind the front
setback, to up to two site boundaries; or
iii. in areas coded R30 to R40, walls not higher than
3.5m for two-thirds the length of the balance of
the site boundary behind the front setback, to
up to two site boundaries; or
iv. where both the subject site and the affected
adjoining site are created in a plan of subdivision
submitted concurrently for the proposed
development, and the boundary walls are
interfacing and of equal dimension.
(Refer Figure Series 5)
C3.3 Where the subject site and an affected adjoining
site are subject to a different density code, in
accordance with clause 5.1.3 C3.2, the length
and height of the boundary wall on the boundary
between them is determined by reference to the
lower density code.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 15

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.1.4 Open space
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P4 Development incorporates suitable open space for C4 Open space provided in accordance with Table
its context to: B (refer Figure Series 6). The site of the grouped
dwelling, for the purpose of calculating the open
• reflect the existing and/or desired streetscape
space requirement, shall include the area allocated
character or as outlined under the local
for the exclusive use of that dwelling and the
planning framework;
proportionate share of any associated common
• provide access to sunlight for the dwelling; property.
• reduce building bulk on the site, consistent
with the expectations of the applicable density
code and/or as outlined in the local planning
framework;
• provide an attractive setting for the buildings,
landscape, vegetation and streetscape;
• provide opportunities for residents to use
space external to the dwelling for outdoor
pursuits and access within/around the site; and
• provide space for utilities and essential
facilities.
5.1.5 Communal open space
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P5.1 Communal open space associated with grouped C5 Where communal open space is provided i. the aggregate of deducted area does not
dwellings is provided for residents’ exclusive use. as common property in a grouped dwelling exceed the area of communal open space; and
P5.2 The location and function of communal open development, the open space required for any ii. the outdoor living area for any dwelling is not
space provides privacy to users and surrounding grouped dwelling having legal and direct physical reduced in area.
access to that open space may be reduced by up
dwellings.
to 20 per cent of the required open space area
provided that:
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 16

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.1.6 Building height
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P6 Building height that creates no adverse impact C6 Buildings which comply with Table 3 for category
on the amenity of adjoining properties or the B area buildings, except where stated otherwise
streetscape, including road reserves and public in the scheme, the relevant local planning policy,
open space reserves; and where appropriate structure plan or local development plan (refer
maintains: Figure Series 7).
• adequate access to sunlight into buildings and
appurtenant open spaces;
• adequate daylight to major openings into
habitable rooms; and
• access to views of significance.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 17

5.2 STREETSCAPE
OBJECTIVES
A To contribute towards the character of
streetscapes including their views and
vistas and provides security for occupants
and passers-by, a landscape to ensure
adequate shade, privacy and open space for
occupants, and an attractive setting for the
collection of buildings.
5.2.1 Setback of carports and garages 5.2.4 Street walls and fences
5.2.2 Garage width 5.2.5 Sightlines
5.2.3 Street surveillance 5.2.6 Appearance of retained dwelling
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 18

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.2.1 Setback of carports and garages
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P1.1 Carports and garages set back to maintain clear C1.1 Garages set back 4.5m from the primary street
sightlines along the street, to not obstruct views except that the setback may be reduced:
of dwellings from the street and vice versa, and
i. in accordance with Figure 8b where the garage
designed to contribute positively to streetscapes
adjoins a dwelling provided the garage is
and to the appearance of dwellings.
at least 0.5m behind the dwelling alignment
P1.2 Garages and/or carports set back to ensure any (excluding any porch, verandah or balcony); or
vehicle parking on a driveway does not impede on
ii. to 3m where the garage allows vehicles to be
any existing or planned adjoining pedestrian, cycle
parked parallel to the street. The wall parallel to
or dual-use path.
the street must include openings.
C1.2 Carports set back in accordance with the primary
street setback requirements of clause 5.1.2 C2.1(i),
except that the setback may be reduced by up to 50
per cent of the minimum setback stated in Table B
where:
i. the width of the carport does not exceed 60
per cent of the frontage;
ii. the construction allows an unobstructed view
between the dwelling and the street, right-of-
way or equivalent; and
iii. the carport roof pitch, colours and materials are
compatible with the dwelling.
(Refer to Figure 8a)
C1.3 Garages and carports built up to the boundary
abutting a communal street or right-of-way which is
not the primary or secondary street boundary for
the dwelling, with manoeuvring space of at least 6m,
located immediately in front of the opening to the
garage or carport and permanently available.
C1.4 Garages and carports set back 1.5m from a
secondary street.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 19

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.2.2 Garage width
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P2 Visual connectivity between the dwelling and the C2 A garage door and its supporting structures (or
streetscape should be maintained and the effect a garage wall where a garage is aligned parallel
of the garage door on the streetscape should to the street) facing the primary street is not to
be minimised whereby the streetscape is not occupy more than 50 per cent of the frontage at the
dominated by garage doors. setback line as viewed from the street (refer Figure
8c). This may be increased up to 60 per cent where
an upper floor or balcony extends for more than half
the width of the garage and its supporting structures
(or a garage wall where a garage is aligned parallel to
the street) and the entrance to the dwelling is clearly
visible from the primary street.
5.2.3 Street surveillance
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P3 Buildings designed to provide for passive C3.1 The street elevation(s) of the dwelling to address
surveillance between individual dwellings and the the street with clearly definable entry points visible
street and between common areas and the street, and accessed from the street.
which minimise opportunities for concealment and
entrapment. C3.2 At least one major opening from a habitable room
of the dwelling faces the street and the pedestrian
or vehicular approach to the dwelling.
C3.3 For battleaxe lots or sites with internal driveway
access, at least one major opening from a habitable
room of the dwelling faces the approach to the
dwelling.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 20

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.2.4 Street walls and fences
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P4 Front fences are low or restricted in height to C4.1 Front fences within the primary street setback area
permit passive surveillance (as per clause 5.2.3) that are visually permeable above 1.2m of natural
and enhance streetscape (as per clause 5.1.2), with ground level, measured from the primary street side
appropriate consideration to the need: of the front fence (refer Figure 12).
• for attenuation of traffic impacts where the C4.2 Solid pillars that form part of front fences not more
street is designated as a primary or district than 1.8m above natural ground level provided the
distributor or integrator arterial; and horizontal dimension of the pillars is not greater
• for necessary privacy or noise screening than 400mm by 400mm and pillars are separated by
for outdoor living areas where the street is visually permeable fencing in line with C4.1 (refer
designated as a primary or district distributor or Figure 12).
integrator arterial.
5.2.5 Sightlines
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P5 Unobstructed sightlines provided at vehicle access C5 Walls, fences and other structures truncated or
points to ensure safety and visibility along vehicle reduced to no higher than 0.75m within 1.5m of
access ways, streets, rights-of-way, communal where walls, fences, or other structures adjoin:
streets, crossovers, and footpaths.
i. a driveway that intersects a street, right-of-way
or communal street;
ii. a right-of-way or communal street that
intersects a public street; and
iii. two streets that intersect. (refer Figure 9a).
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 21

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.2.6 Appearance of retained dwelling
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P6 Dwellings retained as part of a grouped or multiple C6 Where an existing dwelling is retained as part of a
dwelling development, dwelling extension or grouped dwelling development, the appearance
redevelopment are to: of the retained dwelling is upgraded externally to an
equivalent maintenance standard of the new (or the
• enhance the streetscape appearance of the
rest of) the development.
existing dwelling(s) retained; or
• complement established or future built form
in the locality as specified within the relevant
local planning framework.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 22

5.3 SITE PLANNING AND DESIGN
OBJECTIVES
A Landscape design should optimise function,
useability, privacy, social opportunity,
equitable access, respect neighbours’
amenity and provide for practical
establishment and maintenance.
B To ensure access to housing provides for
security, safety, amenity and legibility to
on-site car parking areas and footpaths for
residents and visitors.
C To ensure each development makes a
contribution to a streetscape by respecting
the natural topography for each site,
adjoining properties and the amenity of the
locality.
D To reduce the economic, environmental and
social impacts associated with site works to
facilitate housing development (e.g. via soil
disturbance, groundwater impact and water
use for dust suppression).
5.3.1 Outdoor living areas 5.3.5 Vehicular access
5.3.2 Landscaping 5.3.6 Pedestrian access
5.3.3 Parking 5.3.7 Siteworks
5.3.4 Design of car parking spaces 5.3.9 Stormwater management
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 23

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.3.1 Outdoor living areas
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P1.1 A consolidated outdoor living area is provided C1.1 An outdoor living area to be provided:
to each single house and grouped dwelling
i. in accordance with Table B;
which provides space for entertaining, leisure and
connection to the outdoors that is: ii. behind the street setback area;
iii. directly accessible from the primary living
• of sufficient size and dimension to be functional
space of the dwelling;
and usable;
iv. with a minimum length and width dimension
• capable of use in conjunction with a primary
of 4m; and
living space of the dwelling;
v. with at least two-thirds of the required area
• sufficient in uncovered area to allow for winter
without permanent roof cover.
solar gain and natural ventilation into the
dwelling; (Refer Figure 13).
• sufficient in uncovered area to provide for C1.2 Each multiple dwelling is provided with at least one
landscaping, including the planting of a tree(s); balcony or the equivalent, opening directly from the
and primary living space and with a minimum area of
• optimises use of the northern aspect of the site. 10m2 and minimum dimension of 2.4m.
P1.2 Multiple dwellings to be designed to have direct Note: Minimum dimension refers to the minimum length
access to a balcony, courtyard or equivalent and width of all areas that contribute to the outdoor
outdoor living area that: living area or balcony (or equivalent) space.
i. is of sufficient size to be used by the intended
number of dwelling occupants;
ii. is sited, oriented and designed for occupant
amenity, including consideration of solar
access and natural ventilation appropriate to
the climatic region; and
iii. is capable of being used in conjunction with the
primary living space.
P1.3 Where provided within the street setback area, the
outdoor living area to a single house or grouped
dwelling:
• achieves the design principles of clause 5.3.1
P1.1
• is designed to facilitate street surveillance
between the dwelling and the street; and
• minimises the use of visually impermeable or
solid front fences above 1.2m in height.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 24

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.3.2 Landscaping
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P2 Landscaping of open spaces that: C2.1 Landscaping of grouped and multiple dwelling
Minimum
• contribute to the appearance and amenity of common property and communal open spaces in tree Minimum
accordance with the following:
the development for the residents; Dwelling type requirement tree planting
• contribute to the streetscape; i. the street setback area developed without car area
parking, except for visitors’ bays;
• enhance security and safety for residents;
ii. pedestrian access providing wheelchair Single house and grouped
• contribute to positive local microclimates, 1 tree
accessibility connecting entries to all ground dwelling (per tree area)
including provision of shade and solar access
floor buildings with the public footpath and car
as appropriate; and Less than 700m2 2 trees
parking areas;
• retains existing trees and/or provides new trees Multiple 2x2m
to maintain and enhance the tree canopy and iii. one tree to provide shade for every four dwelling 700-1000m2 3 trees
uncovered car parking spaces (in addition to the (trees per
local sense of place.
trees required in C2.2), with the total number site) Greater than
of trees to be rounded up to the nearest whole 1000m2 4 trees
number;
iv. lighting to pathways, and communal open space
Note:
and car parking areas;
v. bin storage areas conveniently located and i. The minimum tree planting area is to be provided for
screened from view; each tree and shown on the site plan that is submitted
with the application.
vi. trees which are greater than 3m in height shall
be retained, in communal open space which is ii. The tree planting area is to be free of impervious
provided for the development; surfaces and roof cover.
vii. adequate sightlines for pedestrians and
vehicles;
viii. clear line of sight between areas designated
as communal open space and at least two
habitable room windows; and
ix. clothes drying areas which are secure and
screened from view.
C2.2 Landscaping of single houses, grouped dwellings
and multiple dwellings to include the following:
i. the minimum number of trees and associated
planting areas in the table below; and
ii. landscaping of the street setback area, with not
more than 50 per cent of this area to consist of
impervious surfaces.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 25

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.3.3 Parking
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P3.1 Adequate car parking is to be provided on site in C3.1 The following minimum number of on-site car C3.2 On-site visitors’ car parking spaces for grouped and
accordance with projected need related to: parking spaces is to be provided for each single multiple dwelling developments provided at a rate
house, grouped dwelling and special purpose of one space for each four dwellings, or part thereof
• the type, number and size of dwellings;
dwelling comprising the following number of in excess of four dwellings, served by a common
• the availability of on-street and other off-street bedrooms: access.
parking; and
• the proximity of the proposed development to
public transport and other facilities. Car parking spaces Dwellings Visitor bays
P3.2 Consideration may be given to a reduction in the Type of dwelling
minimum number of on-site car parking spaces for Location A Location B 0-4 Nil
grouped and multiple dwellings provided:
5-8 1
• available street parking in the vicinity is 1 bedroom 1 1
controlled by the local government; and
9-12 2
• the decision-maker is of the opinion that a 2+ bedroom dwelling 1 2
sufficient equivalent number of on-street 13-16 3
Aged persons’ dwelling,
spaces are available near the development.
accessible dwelling or small 1 1 1 additional bay for every 4
P3.3 Some or all of the required car parking spaces dwelling 17+ dwellings or part thereof
located off site, provided that these spaces will
meet the following: Ancillary dwelling Nil 1
C3.3 The minimum number of on-site car parking spaces
i. the off-site car parking area is sufficiently close is provided for each multiple dwelling as follows:
to the development and convenient for use by Location A - includes all land located within:
residents and/or visitors;
• 800m walkable catchment of a train station on a
ii. any increase in the number of dwellings high frequency rail route; or Car parking spaces
Plot ratio area and type
or possible plot ratio being matched by a
corresponding increase in the aggregate • 250m walkable catchment of a transit stop: of multiple dwelling
number of car parking spaces; o on a high frequency transit route; or Location A Location B
iii. permanent legal right of access being o that has multiple transit routes, that when
Less than 110m2 and/or 1 or 2
established for all users and occupiers of combined stop every 15 minutes during weekday bedrooms 1 1.25
dwellings for which the respective car parking peak periods (7am – 9am and 5pm – 7pm).
space is to be provided; and 110m2 or greater and or 3 or 1.25 1.5
Location B - includes all land that is not within Location A. more bedrooms
iv. where off-site car parking is shared with other
uses, the total aggregate parking requirement Visitors car parking spaces 0.25 0.25
(per dwelling)
for all such uses, as required by the R-Codes
and the scheme being provided. The number
of required spaces may only be reduced by up For Location A and Location B guidance, refer to clause 5.3.3 C3.1.
to 15 per cent where the non-residential parking
occurs substantially between 9am and 5pm on
weekdays.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 26

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.3.4 Design of car parking spaces
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P4 Car, cycle and other parking facilities are to be C4.1 Car parking spaces and manoeuvring areas designed
designed and located on site to be conveniently and provided in accordance with AS2890.1.
accessed, secure, consistent with the streetscape
and appropriately manage stormwater to protect C4.2 Visitor car parking spaces:
the environment. • marked and clearly signposted as dedicated for
visitor use only, and located close to, or visible
from, the point of entry to the development
and outside any security barrier; and
• provide an accessible path of travel for people
with disabilities.
C4.3 Car parking areas comprising six or more spaces
provided with landscaping between each six
consecutive external car parking spaces to include
shade trees.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 27

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.3.5 Vehicular access
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P5.1 Vehicular access provided for each development C5.1 Access to on-site car parking spaces to be C5.4 Driveways designed for two way access to allow for
site to provide: provided: vehicles to enter the street in forward gear where:
• vehicle access safety; • where available, from a communal street or • the driveway serves five or more dwellings;
• reduced impact of access points on the right-of-way available for lawful use to access • the distance from an on-site car parking space
streetscape; the relevant site and which is adequately paved to the street is 15m or more; or
and drained from the property boundary to a
• legible access; • the street to which it connects is designated as
constructed street; or
• pedestrian safety; a primary distributor or integrator arterial road.
• from a secondary street where no right-of-way
• minimal crossovers; and or communal street exists; or C5.5 Driveways for multiple and grouped dwellings
where the number of dwellings is five or more, shall
• high quality landscaping features. • from the primary street frontage where no be:
P5.2 Development with potential to be subdivided to secondary street, right-of way, or communal
create 20 or more green title lots, strata lots or street exists. • a minimum width of 4m; and
survey strata lots provides legible internal and C5.2 Driveways to primary or secondary street provided • designed to allow vehicles to pass in opposite
external connections to the surrounding road as follows: directions at one or more points.
network, accommodates traffic movement and
C5.6 Driveways designed for multiple and grouped
volume, visitor parking, pedestrian access, street • driveways serving four dwellings or less not
dwellings may be reduced to no less than 3m where
shade trees, utility services and access for waste narrower than 3m at the street boundary; and
it is necessary to retain an existing dwelling and a
collection and emergency service vehicles. • no driveway wider than 6m at the street passing bay or similar is provided.
boundary and driveways in aggregate no greater
than 9m for any one property. C5.7 Where any proposed development has potential to
be subdivided to create 20 or more green title lots,
Dimensions in metres C5.3 Driveways shall be:
strata lots or survey strata lots, with each of these
• no closer than 0.5m from a side lot boundary or lots obtaining driveway access from a communal
6
street pole; street, a minimum total width of 12 metres is
Notes:
TP 1 Accesses to domestic drivew•a ys arne oex cclulodesde r than 6m to a street corner as required required for the communal street which includes a
6 TP f s r e o c m tio t n h e m p a r r o k h e i d b Y it i - o Y n ( i s n e r e e c s l p a e u c s t e o 3 f . 2u th .3n e ( ad k ) e )e rb r AS2890.1; p of a v 5 e .5 d m ve e h tr i e c s u l a a n r d c a a r p ria e g d e e w st a r y ia w n i p th a t a h m as in r i e m q u u m ire w d i d b t y h
2 T a h t t e h p e o m in e t d s i m an a r e k n e d d o X n 1 a a n d d i v X id a• e r e d r r e o sa a p d lei a gc n tni d vee a ly t d at right angles to the street alignment; clause 5.3.6.
TP TP the intersection of the main •ro ad cleonctrea-tliened so as to avoid street trees, or, where this
and the extensions of the side roaids p uronpearvtyo idable, the street trees replaced at the
6 Prohibited locations 6 lines shown as dotted lines, on an a u p nd p iv l id ic ed a nt’s expense or replanting arrangements
shown by heavy line road. On a divided road, dimension Y - Y extends
X1
X X
to point Y1 to be approved by the decision-maker; and
• adequately paved and drained.
900 Dimensions in metres
6 6
Y1 Y Y
Notes
6
1 Access to domestic driveways are excluded from the prohibition in respect of the kerb section marked Y-Y (see clause 3.2.3(a))
TP = Tangent point Source: AS/NZS 2890.1:2004 (figure 3.1)
2 The points marked X1 and X are respectively at the median end on a divided road and at the intersection of the main road centre-line and the
AS2890.1 - Prohibited locations of access driveways extensions of the side road propety lines shown as dotted lines, on an undivided road. On a divided road, dimension Y-Y extends to point Y1.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 28

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.3.6 Pedestrian access
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P6 Legible, safe, and direct access for pedestrians C6.1 Where a group of 10 or more dwellings is served by C6.3 A communal street or pedestrian path is to be no
to move between communal car parking areas or a communal street, between a public street or a closer than 2.5m to any wall with a major opening
public streets and individual dwellings. communal car parking area and individual dwellings; unless privacy screening is provided to the
a minimum 1.2m wide pedestrian path, separate communal street or pedestrian path.
from the vehicular access, is provided and designed
C6.4 For multiple dwellings with only stair access,
according to AS1428.1.
staircases are designed to access no more than two
C6.2 Where a communal street serves more than two dwellings per floor level and the stairs, landings and
dwellings and is shared by pedestrians and vehicles, porches are to be protected from the weather.
the configuration of the pedestrian and vehicular
C6.5 Pedestrian paths provided as required by clause
routes is to provide clear sightlines, adequate
5.3.2 C2(ii).
lighting and paving surfaces to slow traffic to ensure
pedestrian safety.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 29

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.3.7 Site works
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P7.1 Development that considers and responds to the C7.1 Retaining walls, fill and excavation between the Notes:
natural features of the site and requires minimal street boundary and the street setback, not more
excavation/fill. than 0.5m above or below the natural ground level, i. Take the nearest higher value for all height and length
calculations.
except where necessary to provide for pedestrian,
P7.2 Where excavation/fill is necessary, all finished
levels respecting the natural ground level at the lot universal and/or vehicle access, drainage works or ii. Measurement of the height of site works or retaining
boundary of the site and as viewed from the street. natural light to a dwelling. walls for the purpose of calculating Table 4 setback
is to be taken from the natural ground level at the lot
C7.2 Retaining walls, fill and excavation within the site and
P7.3 Retaining walls that result in land which can be boundary adjacent to that point of the site works or
behind the required street setback to comply with
effectively used for the benefit of residents and do retaining wall.
Table 4.
not detrimentally affect adjoining properties and
are designed, engineered and landscaped having Table 4 Setback of site works and retaining walls iii. Visual privacy provisions under clause 5.4.1 and
due regard to clause 5.4.1. overshadowing provisions under clause 5.4.2 apply.
Height of site works and/ iv. Where a boundary wall incorporates a retaining wall
Required minimum setback
or retaining walls directly beneath the boundary wall, the retaining wall
does not require assessment under clause 5.3.7 and is to
0.5m or less 0m be included in the wall height for the purpose of clause
5.1.3.
1m 1m
C7.3 Subject to subclause C7.2 above, all excavation or
filling behind a street setback line and within 1m of a
1.5m 1.5m
lot boundary, not more than 0.5m above the natural
ground level at the lot boundary except where
2m 2m
otherwise stated in the scheme, local planning
policy, structure plan or local development plan.
2.5m 2.5m
3m 3m
Clause 5.3.8 Retaining walls deleted by amendment dated 2/7/2021
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 30

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.3.9 Stormwater management
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P9.1 Stormwater is managed on site wherever possible C9 All water draining from roofs, driveways, communal
either by containment or infiltration, as permitted by streets and other impermeable surfaces shall be
the soil and other site conditions and which reduce directed to garden areas, sumps or rainwater tanks
the export of nutrients and sediments from the site within the development site where climatic and
into waterways or otherwise appropriately managed soil conditions allow for the effective retention of
prior to off-site discharge. stormwater on site.
P9.2 Encourage the recovery and reuse of stormwater
for non-potable water applications using integrated
design and fit-for-purpose water applications.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 31

5.4 BUILDING DESIGN
OBJECTIVES
A To design buildings and landscape to
minimise adverse impact on the privacy of
adjoining dwellings and private open space.
B To optimise comfortable living, access
to sunlight and solar energy to facilitate
sustainable housing development with
particular regard for place and local
conditions.
C To maintain the amenity of streetscapes
and views along the street by ensuring that
associated outbuildings and other fixtures
attached to buildings do not detract from
the streetscape and are not visually intrusive
to neighbouring properties or adjoining
public spaces.
5.4.1 Visual Privacy
5.4.2 Solar access for adjoining sites
5.4.3 Outbuildings
5.4.4 External fixtures, utilities and facilities
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 32

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.4.1 Visual privacy
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P1.1 Minimal direct overlooking of active habitable C1.1 Major openings and outdoor active habitable or;
spaces and outdoor living areas of adjacent spaces, which have a floor level of more than 0.5m
ii. are provided with permanent screening to
dwellings achieved through: above natural ground level and overlook any part
restrict views within the cone of vision from any
of any other residential property behind its street
• building layout and location; major opening or an outdoor active habitable
setback line are:
• design of major openings; space.
• landscape screening of outdoor active i. set back, in direct line of sight within the cone C1.2 Screening devices such as obscure glazing, timber
habitable spaces; and/or of vision, from the lot boundary, a minimum screens, external blinds, window hoods and
distance as prescribed in the table below (refer shutters are to be at least 1.6m in height, at least
• location of screening devices. Figure Series 10): 75 per cent obscure, permanently fixed, made of
P1.2 Maximum visual privacy to side and rear boundaries durable material and restrict view in the direction of
through measures such as: Location overlooking into any adjoining property.
• offsetting the location of ground and first floor
Note:
windows so that viewing is oblique rather than Types of habitable rooms / Setback for
direct; active habitable spaces Setback for areas coded i. Where the subject site and an affected adjoining site
area coded are subject to a different R-Code the setback distance is
• building to the boundary where appropriate; higher than
R50 or lower determined by reference to the lower density code.
• setting back the first floor from the side R50
boundary; Major openings to bedrooms ii. Line of sight setback distances shall be measured by
• providing higher or opaque and fixed windows; and studies 4.5m 3m application of the cone of vision set out in Figure Series
10.
and/or
Major openings to habitable
• screen devices (including landscaping, fencing, rooms other than bedrooms and 6m 4.5m iii. Line of sight setback distances include the width of any
obscure glazing, timber screens, external blinds, studies adjoining right-of-way, communal street or battleaxe
window hoods and shutters). Outdoor active habitable leg or the like.
spaces (with a floor level more
7.5m 6m iv. These provisions apply to adjoining sites only where
than 0.5m above natural ground
that land is zoned to allow for residential development.
level)
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 33

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.4.2 Solar access for adjoining sites
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P2.1 Effective solar access for the proposed C2.1 Notwithstanding the lot boundary setbacks in
development and protection of the solar access. clause 5.1.3, development in climate zones 4, 5 and
6 of the State shall be so designed that its shadow
P2.2 Development designed to protect solar access
cast at midday, 21 June, onto any other adjoining
for neighbouring properties taking account the
property does not exceed the following limits:
potential to overshadow existing:
• on adjoining properties coded R25 and lower –
• outdoor living areas;
25 per cent of the site area;
• north facing major openings to habitable
• on adjoining properties coded R30 to R40
rooms, within 15 degrees of north in each
inclusive – 35 per cent of the site area; or
direction; or
• on adjoining properties coded higher than R40 –
• roof mounted solar collectors.
50 per cent of the site area.
Note: With regard to clause 5.4.2 C2.1:
o dividing fences of up to 2.0 metres in height do not
contribute to overshadowing calculations; and
o site area refers to the surface of the adjoining lot
and is measured without regard to any building on it
but taking into account its natural ground level.
C2.2 Where a development site shares its southern
boundary with a lot, and that lot is bound to the
north by another lot(s), the limit of shading for the
development site set out in clause 5.4.2 C2.1 shall
be reduced proportionate to the percentage of
the affected property’s northern boundary that the
development site abuts (refer to Figure 11b).
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 34

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.4.3 Outbuildings
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P3 Outbuildings that do not detract from the C3 Outbuildings associated with a dwelling site
streetscape or the visual amenity of residents or address either:
neighbouring properties.
i. the standards for small outbuildings (A. Small
outbuilding); or
ii. the standards for large and multiple outbuildings
(B. Large and multiple outbuildings).
i. no more than one outbuilding per dwelling site;
ii. has no more than two boundary walls;
A.Small iii. does not exceed 10m2 in area
outbuilding iv. does not exceed a wall height of 2.7m;
v. not located within the primary or secondary street setback area; and
vi. does not reduce open space and outdoor living area requirements in Table B.
OR
i. individually or collectively does not exceed 60m2 in area or 10 percent in aggregate of the
site area, whichever is the lesser;
B.Large and ii. set back in accordance with Table 2a;
multiple iii. does not exceed a wall height of 2.4m;
outbuildings iv. does not exceed a ridge height of 4.2m;
v. not located within the primary or secondary street setback area; and
vi. does not reduce the open space and outdoor living area requirements in Table B.
Notes:
i. An outbuilding wall that meets (ii) for small outbuildings does not contribute to the number or dimension of boundary walls
under clause 5.1.3.
ii. An existing outbuilding that meets the development standards for small outbuildings does not need to be set back in
accordance with Table 2a for additional outbuildings that are proposed under B. Large and multiple outbuildings.
iii. There are separate building code requirements that may also apply.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 35

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.4.4 External fixtures, utilities and facilities
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P4.1 Solar collectors, aerials, antennas, satellite dishes, C4.1 Solar collectors installed on the roof or other parts C4.6 Where rubbish bins are not collected from the
pipes and utilities integrated into the design of the of buildings. street immediately adjoining a dwelling, there shall
building to not be visually obtrusive when viewed be provision of a communal pick-up area or areas
from the street and to protect the visual amenity of C4.2 Television aerials of the standard type, essential which are:
plumbing vent pipes above the roof line and external
surrounding properties.
roof water down pipes. i. conveniently located for rubbish and recycling
P4.2 External location of storeroom, rubbish collection/ pick-up;
bin areas, and clothes drying areas where these are: C4.3 Other utilities provided they are:
ii. accessible to residents;
i. not visible from the primary street;
• convenient for residents; iii. adequate in area to store all rubbish bins; and
ii. are designed to integrate with the building; or
• rubbish collection areas which can be accessed iv. fully screened from view from the primary or
by service vehicles; iii. are located so as not to be visually obtrusive. secondary street.
• screened from view; and C4.4 Antennas, satellite dishes and the like not visible C4.7 Clothes-drying areas screened from view from the
• able to be secured and managed. from any primary and secondary street. primary and secondary street.
C4.5 An enclosed, lockable storage area, constructed in
a design and material matching the dwelling where
visible from the street, accessible from outside the
dwelling, with a minimum dimension of 1.5m when
provided external to a garage and 1m when provided
within a garage and an internal area of at least 4m2,
for each grouped dwelling.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 36

5.5 SPECIAL PURPOSE DWELLING
OBJECTIVES
A To ensure residential development is
provided to accommodate people with or
without special needs.
B To provide ancillary accommodation which
is independent or semi-independent to
residents of the single house.
C To ensure that dwellings for aged persons
and people with special needs can be
provided within residential areas.
D To provide opportunities for affordable
housing.
5.5.1 Ancillary dwellings 5.5.4 Accessible dwellings
5.5.2 Aged and dependent persons' 5.5.5 Small dwellings
dwellings
5.5.3 Single bedroom dwellings
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 37

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.5.1 Ancillary dwellings
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P1.1 Ancillary dwelling is of a small scale and designed C1 Ancillary dwelling associated with a single house or vi. ancillary dwelling does not preclude the single
to support people living independently or semi- grouped dwelling and on the same site where: house or grouped dwelling from meeting the
dependently to the residents of the single house or required minimum open space and outdoor
i. C1i deleted by amendment dated 10 April 2024;
grouped dwelling, sharing some site facilities and living area; and
services. ii. there is a maximum internal floor area of 70m2;
vii. ancillary dwelling complies with all other
P1.2 Ancillary dwellings to positively contribute to iii. parking is provided in accordance with clause R-Code provisions, only as they apply to
its setting, including the existing single house or 5.3.3 C3.1; single houses and grouped dwellings, with the
grouped dwelling and, where visible from the iv. ancillary dwelling is located behind the street exception of clauses:
street or adjoining properties, to the amenity of setback line; a. Part D, 1.1 Site area;
the streetscape and context. v. C1v deleted by amendment dated 10 April 2024; b. 5.2.3 Street surveillance (except where
located on a lot with secondary street or
right-of-way access); and
c. 5.3.1 Outdoor living areas.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 38

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.5.2 Aged and dependent persons’ dwellings
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P2 Aged or dependent persons’ dwellings for the C2.1 Aged or dependent persons’ dwellings for the C2.3 All dwellings to incorporate, as a minimum, the
housing of aged or dependent persons designed to housing of aged or dependent persons shall comply following:
meet the needs of aged or dependent persons; and with the following:
i. all external and internal doors to provide a
• reduces car dependence, i.e. is located in close i. a maximum internal floor area of: minimum 820mm clear opening. (AS4299 clause
proximity to public transport and services; • in the case of single houses or grouped 4.3.3);
• has due regard to the topography of the locality dwellings – 100m2; or ii. internal corridors to be a minimum 1,000mm
in which the site is located in respect to access • in the case of multiple dwellings – 80m2; wide, width to be increased to a minimum of
and mobility; 1,200mm in corridors with openings on side
ii. a minimum number of five dwellings within any
• has due regard to the availability of community walls;
single development;
facilities including parks and open space; iii. a visitable toilet (AS4299, clause 1.4.12),
iii. visitors car parking spaces at the rate of one per
• does not impinge upon neighbour amenity; and preferably located within a bathroom; and
four dwellings, with a minimum of one space;
• responds to a demand for aged or dependent iv. toilet and toilet approach doors shall have a
iv. the first visitors car space being a wheelchair
persons’ accommodation in the locality which minimum 250mm nib wall on the door handle
accessible car parking space and a minimum
is recognised in the local planning framework. side of the door and provision for the installation
width of 3.8m in accordance with AS4299,
of grab rails in accordance with AS4299, clause
clause 3.7.1;
4.4.4 (h).
v. an outdoor living area in accordance with the
C2.4 At least one occupant is a disabled or physically
requirements of clause 5.3.1 but reducing the
dependent person or aged person, or is the
area required by Table B by one-third; and
surviving spouse of such a person, and the owner of
vi. comply with all other provisions of Table B and the land, as a condition of development approval,
Part B as relevant. lodging a section 70A notification on the certificate
C2.2 All ground floor units, with a preference for all of title binding the owner, their heirs and successors
dwellings, to incorporate, as a minimum, the in title requiring that this occupancy restriction be
following: maintained.
i. an continuous path of travel from the street
frontage, car parking area or drop-off point in
accordance with the requirements of AS4299
clause 3.3.2; and
ii. level entry to the front entry door with
preferably all external doors having level entries
(diagrams, Figure C1 of AS4299).
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 39

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.5.3 Single bedroom dwellings
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P3 Alternative and affordable housing options for C3 Single bedroom dwellings shall comply with the
singles or couples where it can be demonstrated following:
that the development:
i. a maximum internal floor area of 70m2;
• reduces car dependence, i.e. is located in close
ii. open space and landscaping in accordance
proximity to public transport and convenience
with the requirements of clause 5.1.4 and 5.3.2;
shopping;
iii. parking provided in accordance with clause
• does not impinge upon neighbour amenity; and
5.3.3 C3.1 and C3.2;
• responds to a demand for single bedroom
iv. an outdoor living area in accordance with the
accommodation in the locality which is
requirements of clause 5.3.1 but reducing the
recognised in the local planning framework.
area required by Table B by one-third; and
v. comply with all other elements of Table B and
Part B as relevant.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 40

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.5.4 Accessible dwellings
(only applies to R30 and R40)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P4 Accessible dwellings provide housing options C4 Accessible dwellings that seek to apply the gold
for people with disabilities and/or limited or level universal design site area variation as per Part
reduced mobility, facilitate ageing in place, and are D, C1.1.6 shall;
designed in accordance with the universal design
i. be designed and constructed in accordance
requirements:
with the gold level universal design
i. of the Livable Housing Design Guidelines; requirements of A4 Universal design
ii. of the Australian Building Codes Board Livable requirements, or are certified Livable
Housing Design Standard (2022); Housing Australia to a minimum gold level of
performance; and
iii. of AS4299; and/or
ii. have a maximum internal floor area of 110m2.
iv. to suit the specific needs of the occupant.
Note: All other provisions of the R-Codes still apply.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 41

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
5.5.5 Small dwellings
(only applies to R30 and R40)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
P5.1 The design of small dwellings ensures adequate Small Dwellings – Part D, C1.1.6 applies and provides a
indoor and outdoor amenity for occupants. site area concession
P5.2 Alternative and affordable housing options are C5 Small dwellings subject to the site area concession
provided for small households where it can be of Part D, C1.1.6 shall comply with the following:
demonstrated that the development:
i. a maximum internal floor area of 70m2;
i. is located in an area that has good access to
ii. parking provided in accordance with the table in
public transport, public open space, local
5.3.3 Parking C3.1; and
retailing, and other community infrastructure;
iii. all other provisions of the R-Codes Volume 1.
ii. responds to a demand for small dwellings in the
locality which may be recognised in the local
planning framework;
iii. provides an adequate mix of dwelling sizes; and
iv. is consistent with the existing and/or future
intended streetscape and local character.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 42

TABLES
Table B Primary controls for all single house(s) in areas coded R40 and below, grouped dwellings in areas coded R25 and below; and multiple dwellings in areas
coded R10 to R25
Columns 3-5 deleted and replaced by PART D, Table D by Amendment dated 10 April 2024.
1 2 6 7
R-Code Dwelling Type Open Space Minimum Setbacks (m)
Min total (% of site) Min outdoor living (m2) Primary Street Secondary Street  Other / rear
Single house or
R2 80 - 20 10 10
grouped dwelling
Single house or
R2.5 80 - 15 7.5 7.5
grouped dwelling
Single house or
R5 70 - 12 6 */6
grouped dwelling
Single house or
60 - 7.5 3 */6
R10 grouped dwelling
Multiple dwelling 60 - 7.5 3 */6
Single house or
55 - 7.5 2 */6
R12.5 grouped dwelling
Multiple dwelling 55 - 7.5 2 */6
Single house or
50 - 6 1.5 */6
R15 grouped dwelling
Multiple dwelling 50 - 6 1.5 *
Single house or
50 36 6 1.5 *
R17.5 grouped dwelling
Multiple dwelling 50 - 6 1.5 *
Single house or
50 30 6 1.5 *
R20 grouped dwelling
Multiple dwelling 50 - 6 1.5 *
Single house or
50 30 6 1.5 *
R25 grouped dwelling
Multiple dwelling 50 - 6 1.5 *
R30 Single house 45 24 4 1.5 *
R35 Single house 45 24 4 1.5 *
R40 Single house 45 20 4 1 *
Legend
 Secondary street: includes communal street, private street, right-of-way as street
- Indicated not applicable
* See Tables 2a and 2b and clause 5.1.3
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 43

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Table 2a Boundary setbacks – walls with no major openings
Wall Length
9 or less 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 25 Over 25
Wall height (m)
3.5 or less* 1 1 1 1 1 1 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5
4.0 1.1 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.8
4.5 1.1 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.7 1.7 1.7 1.8 2.0
5.0 1.1 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.3
5.5 1.2 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.3 2.5
6.0 1.2 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.2 2.4 2.8
6.5 1.2 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.2 2.2 2.3 2.7 3.0
7.0 1.2 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.8 3.3
7.5 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 3.0 3.5
8.0 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.2 2.4 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 3.1 3.8
8.5 1.4 1.6 1.7 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.3 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.3 4.1
9.0 1.4 1.7 1.7 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.4 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.6 4.3
9.5 1.4 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.1 2.4 2.5 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.2 3.8 4.6
10.0 1.5 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.3 4.0 4.8
Take the nearest higher value for all intermediate height and length values.
* Possible nil setback in accordance with clause 5.1.3.
Table 2b Boundary setbacks – walls with major openings
Wall Length
9 or less 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 25 Over 25
Wall height (m)
3.5 or less* 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5
4.0 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.5 2.7 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.3 3.4 3.6 4.5 5.0
4.5 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.4 3.7 3.8 4.0 4.8 5.4
5.0 2.3 2.5 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.0 4.2 5.1 5.7
5.5 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.9 4.2 4.4 4.6 5.5 6.0
6.0 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.2 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.7 6.3
6.5 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.4 4.7 4.9 5.2 6.1 6.6
7.0 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.8 4.1 4.3 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.5 6.4 7.0
7.5 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 6.6 7.3
8.0 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 7.0 7.7
8.5 4.0 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.2 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 7.3 8.0
9.0 4.3 4.5 4.7 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6 7.6 8.3
9.5 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.7 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.9 8.0 8.7
10.0 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.7 6.0 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.2 8.2 9.0
Take the nearest higher value for all intermediate height and length values.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 44

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Table 3 Maximum building heights
Building category Maximum height of wall (m) Maximum total building height (m)
Gable, skillion and concealed roof Hipped and pitched roof
Category A 3.5 5 7
Category B 7 8 10
Category C 9 10 12
i. Category B will apply unless a scheme, the relevant local planning policy, structure plan or local development plan requires the application of category A
(generally single level development) or category C (development on three levels) or an alternative standard.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 45

FIGURES
Figure 2a – Measuring primary street setbacks
(clause 5.1.2 C2.1 iii)
A2
house
A2
carport
A1
A3
S4
street
alignment
street
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 46
yradnuob
edis
yradnuob
edis
Figure Series 2 - Street setbacks
Intent
The purpose of Figure Series 2 is to illustrate how to determine street setbacks for the purposes of clause 5.1.2.
Development within the street setback is to be designed to limit the visual intrusion into views from
neighbouring dwellings into the street and from along the street.
S3 S3
Figure 2b -Measuring minor projections into primary street setback
(clause 5.1.2 C2.4)
S2
Figure 2b - Measuring minor projections into primary street setback
(clause 5.1.2 C2.4) (deleted by amendment dated 2/7/2021)
S1
A1 Area of building forward of primary street setback
A1 Area of building forward of primary street setbck
A2 Compensating open space behind primary street setback
A2 Compensating open area behind primary street setback
A3 The carport in S1 does not need to be compensated for in S2
A3 The carport in S1 does not need to be compensated for in S2.
S1 PriTmhaer pyo srttrieone to sf ethtbe accarkp doirstt wanitchein ( ST2a bdolee Bs )not constitute open space
S2 Disatnadn ccaen bneoht icnodn ttrhieb upteri mtoa Ary2 street setback, equal to S1
S3 S1 SidPeri bmoauryn dstarreye st estebtbaacckk ( Tdaisbtalen c2ea (aTnadb l2eb B))
S4 S2 MaDxiismtaunmce r ebdeuhicnedd t hper ipmriamrya rsyt rsetreete st estebtbaacckk (,h eaqlfu oafl tSo1 )S1
S3 Side boundary setback (Table 2a and 2b)
S4 Maximum reduced primary street setback (half of S1)
Figure 2a - Measuring primary street setbacks (clause 5.1.2 C2.1 (iii))

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure 2c - Measuring street setback for garages
(clause 5.1.2 and 5.2.1)
2.5m communal street setback
(clause 5.1.2 C2.1 iv)
S3 S3
house
A2 S2
garage
A1 A1
S1
S4
Garage setback Street alignment
may be reduced in
accordance with Primary street setback
5.2.1 C1.1 (i and ii) (Table B column 7)
surveillance
A1 Area of building forward of primary street setbck
A2 Compensating open area behind primary street setback
S1 Primary street setback distance (Table B)
S2 Distance behind the primary street setback, equal to S1
S3 Side boundary setback (Table 2a and 2b) 1.5m communal street setback
S4 Maximum reduced primary street setback (half of S1) (Table B column 7 secondary street)
Front door (main frontage)
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 47
teerts
lanummoc
Figure 2d - Measuring communal street setbacks
Figure Series 2 - Street setbacks (cont.) (clause 5.1.2 C2.1 iv)
A1 Area of building forward of primary street setback
A2 Compensating open space behind primary street setback
A3 The carport in S1 does not need to be compensated for in S2
S1 Primary street setback distance (Table B)
S2 Distance behind the primary street setback, equal to S1
primary street
S3 Side boundary setback (Table 2a and 2b)
S4 Maximum reduced primary street setback (half of S1)
Figure 2c - Measuring street setback for garages Figure 2d - Measuring communal street setbacks
(clause 5.1.2 and 5.2.1) (clause 5.1.2 C2.1 (iv))

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure Series 2 - Street setbacks (cont.)
Figure 2e - Measuring minor projections into
primary street setback (clause 5.1.2 C2.4)
house
porch
S1
S4
Street alignment
S1 Primary street setback distance (Table B) N or o e te q : u a iv p a o le rc n h t , i s b n a o lc t o s n u y b , j v e e c r t a t n o d t a h h e
SS14 MParxiimmuma rreydu scetdr periematr ys setrteebt saectbkac kd (hisaltf oafn S1c)e (cTomapbenlseat iBng) area requirement
stated in 5.1.2 C2.1 iii
S4 Maximum reduced primary street setback (half of S1)
Note: a porch, balcony, verandah or equivalent is not subject to the
compensating area requirement stated in 5.1.2 C2.1 (iii).
Figure 2e - Measuring minor projections into primary street
setback (clause 5.1.2 C2.4)
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 48

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
H
natural ground level
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 49
yradnuob
Figure 3a - Cross section, flat site
H
finished floor level
natural
ground
level
yradnuob
Figure 3b - Cross section, sloping site
H
natural ground level
yradnuob
Figure Series 3 - Wall height for lot boundary setbacks
Intent
The purpose of Figure Series 3 is to illustrate the correct method for measuring the height of
various walls and buildings for the purposes of clause 5.1.3 C3.1(i).
Figure 3c - Cross section, flat site
Notes
H = The height of the wall for the measurement
of setbacks is measured from the natural
ground level at the lot boundary adjacent to
Figure 3a - Cross section, flat site Figure 3b - Cross section, sloping site Figutrhee 3wcal l- t oC trhoes hsig sheesct tpiooinn,t folfa tth sei bteuilding
vertically above that point where the wall
touches the underside of the eave/gutter
(Figures 3a-3g)
Notes
H = The height of the wall for the measurement of setbacks is measured from the natural ground level at the lot boundary adjacent Where the lot boundary adjacent to the wall
to the wall at the highest point of the building vertically above that point where the wall touches the underside of the eave/gutter is lower than the natural ground level at the base
(Figures 3a-3g). of the wall, the greater height is used
Where the lot boundary adjacent to the wall is lower than natural ground level at the base of the wall, the greater height is used (Figures 3b, 3d and 3f)
(3b, 3d and 3f).
Where the lot boundary adjacent to the wall is higher than the natural ground level at the base of the wall, the lesser height is used Where the lot boundary adjacent to the wall is
(Figure 3e). higher than the natural ground level at the base
of the wall, the lesser height is used (Figure 3e)

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
H
finished floor level
natural
ground
level
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 50
yradnuob
Figure 3d - Cross section, sloped site
H
finished floor level
natural
ground
level
yradnuob
Figure 3e - Cross section, sloped site
yradnuob
yradnuob
Figure 3f - Cross section, alternate levels
with existing retaining wall
H
H
pre-existing
retaining wall
Figure 3d - Cross section, sloped site Figure 3e - Cross section, sloped site Figure 3f - Cross section, alternate levels with existing
retaining wall
Figure 3g - Skillion roof
Notes
H = The height of the wall for the measurement of setbacks is measured from the natural
ground level at the lot boundary adjacent to the wall to the highest point of the
building vertically above that point where the wall touches the underside of the eave/
gutter (Figures 3a-g)
H Where the lot boundary adjacent to the wall is lover than the natural ground level at
the base of the wall, the greater height is used (Figures 3b, 3d and 3f)
Where the lot boundary adjacent to the wall is higher than the natural ground level at
the base of the wall the lesser height is used (Figure 3e)
ground level at boundary
Figure 3g - Skillion roof

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure Series 4 - Wall length for lot boundary setbacks
Intent
The purpose of Figure Series 4 is to illustrate the method for measuring the appropriate
setback for a length of wall adjacent to a lot boundary for the purposes of clause 5.1.3 C3.1.
Notes
For the purposes of calculating setback, the length of
E E wall means the total horizontal dimension of the side
of the building nearest the lot boundary. Setbacks
shall be determined in accordance with the following
and with reference to Tables 2a and 2b, subject to the
privacy requirements of clauses 5.4.1:
4a Where A is more than 3m, B shall be treated as a
C A C C D separate wall, providing that the length C shall be the
basis for determining the setback of the rest of the side
of the building.
D
4b Where the side of a building includes one portion of a
wall without a major opening (such as E), the setback
B shall be determined independently providing the
E setback of the rest of that side of the building (D) is
determined on the basis of the total length C.
4c Where the side of the building includes two or more
portions of a wall without a major opening (such as
E) their setbacks shall be determined independently
of each other provided they are separated from one
another by a distance (D) of more than 4m (in the case
of wall heights of 6m or less) and an additional 1m for
every 3m increase in height.
Figure 4a - Articulated walls with major Figure 4b - Portions of wall without major Figure 4c - Wall with multiple articulations The setback of D shall be determined on the basis of
openings (where wall height exceeds 3.5m) openings the total length (C).
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 51

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
L2 for H3
L1 for H3
Figure 4e - Boundary setbacks for walls greater than
Table 2a and 2b
2 m 2 m
floor level Figure 4e – Boundary setbacks for walls greater battleaxe leg 4m
H3 than Table 2a and 2b (deleted by amendment
2 m floor level 2m
H2 dated 2/7/2021)
H1
ground level at boundary
L1 for H2
L2 for H2 and L1 for H1
1.5m reduced setback 2m max
pedestrian accessway
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 52
decuder kcabtes yaw
fo
thgir
Figure 4f - Reduced boundary setbacks
(clause 5.1.3 C3.1 i and vi)
S3 S3
reduced setback
S3
Notes
L1 Length of walls on the ground floor is determined as per Figures 4a-c.
Length of walls with major openings on upper floors is determined as the
lesser of the actual length of wall or from a point 2m beyond each major
opening.
Length for walls without major openings on upper floors is determined as
per Figures 4a-c.
Notes
S3 Side boundary setbacks (Tables 2a and 2b)
Notes
Setbacks can be reduced by half the width of adjoining battleaxe lot legs,
pedestrian access ways or rights-of-way to a maximum of 2m.
S3 Side boundary setback (Tables 2a and 2b)
Figure 4d - Measurement of length of upper floor walls for calculating Figure S 4 et f b - a R c e ks d c u a c n e b d e b re o d u u n c d ed a r b y y s h e a t lf b t a h c e k w s i dth of adjoining
setbacks (clause 5.1.3 C3.1 (i) and (vi))
battleaxe lot legs, pedestrian access ways or rights-of-way
to a maximum of 2m.

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure Series 5 - Lot boundary walls
Intent
The purpose of Figure Series 5 is to illustrate the correct method for measuring the height of
various walls for the purposes of clause 5.1.3of clause 5.1.3 C3.1.
Figure 5a - Elevation - flat site Figure 5b - Elevation - sloped site
H1 H2
H
H H3
finished floor level finished floor level
natural ground level at lot boundary
Notes
natural
ground
level
natural
ground
level
The height of a lot boundary wall shall be measured
to the point immediately above the natural ground Fig. 5 The height shall be the height of the wall
Nolteevsel below. at its highest point above the natural Notes
The height of a lot boundary wall shall be measured to the point immediately above the ground level (H) Where the boundary is sloped and the boundary
natural ground level below. wall is not consistent in height for its length, or
The height shall be the height of the wall at its highest point above the natural ground comprises a pitch, the height shall be the average
level. of H1, H2, and H3, where H2 is the maximum height
above natural ground level, and H1 and H3 are the
height above natural ground level at each end of the
wall.
Figure 5a - Elevation - flat site Figure 5b - Elevation - sloped site Figure 5c - Elevation - sloped site
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 53

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure Series 6 - Open space
Intent
The purpose of Figure Series 6 is to illustrate the appropriate design and functionality of
portions of the site which may be used for open space.
HOUSE
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 54
yradnuob
edis
yradnuob
edis
Figure 6a - Measuring open space (clause 5.1.4 C4)
A
primary living space B
Notes
S3 Side boundary (Tables 2a and 2b)
S3 S3
A Uncovered open space
B Unenclosed, covered outdoor living area
C C
(to a maximum 10 per cent site area or 50m2, whichever is lesser)
C Side setback area
D Undercovered driveway or uncovered car parking spaces
OPEN SPACE = A+B+C+D
A D A
Primary street frontage
Notes
S3 Side boundary setback (Tables 2a and 2b)
Fig A u r e U 6 n a c - o vMereeads ouprienng soppaecen space (clause 5.1.4 C4)
B Unenclosed, covered outdoor living area
(to a maximum 10 per cent site area or 50m2, whichever is lesser)
C Side setback area
D Uncovered driveway or uncovered car parking spaces
OPEN SPACE = A + B + C + D

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure Series 7 - Building height
Intent
The purpose of Figure Series 6 is to show how to measure building height for the purposes of
clause 5.1.6.
height limit
line
H
H
H
natural
ground level deemed natural ground level
Notes
The height of a building is taken as the highest point
at any part of the development immediately above
natural ground level.
Where natural ground level varies across the site,
deemed natural ground level is to be used.
Figure 7a - Measuring building height Figure 7b - Deemed natural ground level
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 55
yradnuob
tol
yradnuob
tol
yradnuob
tol
yradnuob
tol
Concealed roof
Two storey example for wall and building height
dna
llaW
latoT
thgieh
gnidliub
Skillion roof
thgieh
llaW
thgieh
gnidliub
latoT
Pitched roof
thgieh
llaW
thgieh
gnidliub
latoT
natural ground level natural ground level
Gable roof
natural ground level natural ground level
thgieh
llaW
thgieh
gnidliub
latoT
Figure 7c - Building height calculations (clause 5.1.6)

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure Series 8 - Garages and carports
Intent
The purpose of Figure Series 8 is to illustrate the determination of primary street setbacks and
the measurement of width for garages and carports for the purposes of clauses 5.2.1 and 5.2.2.
S3 S3
house
carport
S1
S4 L2
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 56
yradnuob
edis
yradnuob
edis
Figure 8a - Carport setbacks (clause 5.2.1 C1.2)
S3 S3
S2
garage
primary street frontage
S1 S6
Notes
S1 Primary street setback distance (Table B )
S3 Side boundary setback (Tables 2a and 2b) S4 Maximum reduced setback (half S1)
L2 Maximum 50 per cent of frontage
yradnuob
edis
yradnuob
edis
Fig. 8b - Garage setbacks (clause 5.2.1 C1.1)
6.5m
house 13m frontage
gagraargaeg ed odoorosr sa nadn dit ist ss suupppporotirntigng
structuresnotmorethan50%offrontage
structures not more than 50% of frontage 0.5m
primary street frontage
Notes Notes
S2 Distance behind the primary street setback, equal to S1.
S1 Primary street setback distance (Table B) S2 Distance behind primary street setback equal to S1.
S3 Side boundary setback (Tables 2a and 2b) S6 The area oSf6 t hTehe g aareraa goef t fhoer gwaraargde ofofr twhaerd p orfi mthea rpyri mstarrey esttr eet setback
S4 Maximum reduced setback (half S1) s th e e tb s a e c tb k a is c k t o i n i i s n b a t a eo cc c c b co oe or mc rdd o a pm na e cn p e n c e s we nas iwt at h et i e C d t d hl a b b cu yy sl a e oo u p 5 p s e .1e en .2 n s 5 C p s . 2 1 ap . . c 1 2 ae a C n cb d ee 2 F h . b 1 i i g n e au dh nr t e i d hn 2 e d a s . etback
L2 Maximum 50 per cent of frontage Figure 2a.
Figure 8a - Carport setbacks (clause 5.2.1 C1.2) Figure 8b - Garage setbacks (clause 5.2.1 C1.1) Figure 8c - Garage doors (clause 5.2.2 C2)

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure Series 9 - Sight lines
Intent
TFhigeu preu r9pao -s Leo ocfa Ftiigounrse o Sfe trriuensc 8a tisio tnos i lolur srterdatuec aerde faesn tcoe b hee kigehptt clear for the purposes of clause 5.2.5 C5.
dwelling
minimum 0.5m
(clause 5.3.5 C5.3)
truncation of fence
driveway
for sight lines
1m lot
1.5m truncation 1.5m
1m
1m
1.5m 1.5m 1.5m
Figure 9a - Locations of truncations or reduced fence height
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 57

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure Series 10 - Privacy
Intent
The purpose of Figure Series 8 is to illustrate areas to be kept
clear for the purposes of clause 5.2.5 C5.
Lot Boundary
45°
45°
Lot Boundary
balcony 45°
45°
Lot Boundary
45° 45°
raised 0.5m
outdoor living
45°
Figure 10a - Establishing the horizontal component of cone of vision Figure 10b - Measurement of minimum privacy separation distances
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 58

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
lot boundaries
balcony screening
living
existing bed 1 bed 2 existing
dwelling dwelling
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 59
m5.7
m
7.5
m
7.5
outdoor 45° shallower angle of
living area view does not apply
6m
45°
4.5m
yradnuob
tol
balcony
screen
Notes
Hatching over adjoining outdoor living area requires
screening for compliance as shown.
Figure 10c - Measuring privacy setbacks using the cone of vision

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure Series 11 - Overshadowing
Intent
The purpose of Figure Series 11 is to illustrate the correct way of
measuring overshadowing for the purposes of clause 5.4.2.
25m 25m
LOT A LOT B
shares 50% of Lot C's shares 50% of Lot C's
northern boundary northern boundary
N
vertical
sun angle
building building
X
eaves overhang X = length of shadow shadow shadow
on adjoining lot
building lot A can cast
shadow over R20 lot B can cast shadow
maximum 12.5% maximum 25% of site over maximum 12.5%
of Lot C site area can be overshadowed of Lot C site area
area
shadow
dimension X
LOT C
50m
Figure 11a - Calculation of overshadowing Figure 11b - Proportionate limits from shared northern boundaries (clause 5.4.2 C2.2)
(clause 5.4.2 C2.1)
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 60

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure Series 12 - Fences
Figure 12 - Measuring visually permeable fences above 1.2m (Clause 5.2.4 )
Primary street
boundary
P2 P2 P2
V Notes
H maximum height of visually impermeable fencing 1.2m*
P1 o N n a d tu e r v a e l l g o r p o m un e d n l t e s v it e e l V P P2 1 m pi a lla x r im d u im m e p n i s ll i a o r n h 4 e 0 ig 0 h m t m of x 1 . 4 8 0 m 0 * mm maximum
V area above 1.2m to be visually permeable*
H
H *measured from natural ground level on the primary
street side of the fence
Verge
Note
Figure 12 - Measuring visually permeable fences above 1.2m (claus H e 5 m .2 ax .4 im ) um height of visually impermeable fencing 1.2 m *
P1 maximum pillar height of 1.8m*
P2 pillar dimension 400mm x 400mm maximum
V area above 1.2m to be visually permeable*
* measured from natural ground level on the primary street
side of the fence
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 61

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
5.1 Context | 5.2 Streetscape | 5.3 Site planning and design | 5.4 Building design | 5.5 Special purpose dwellings | Tables | Figures
Figure Series 13 - Outdoor living areas
Figure 13 – Dimensions and calculationsforoutdoor livingareas (clause 5.3.1 C1.1)
Figure 13 – Dimensions and calculationsforoutdoor livingareas (clause 5.3.1 C1.1)
Notes
Notes
(M x M) = Minimum dimension (4m) for a space
T to cont N r(Mib o xu t e Mte s ) =t oM ioniumtudmo doimr elinvsiionng ( 4amre) fao.r a space
M T (tMo cxoMnt)r i=b uMtei ntoi mouutdmo odri mliveinng sairoean. (4m) for a space to contribute to
M (T x T) = Miniomuutmdo OorL lAiv i(nmg a) rreeaq.uired under Table B
(T x T) = Minimum OLA (m) required under Table B
(TxT) = Minimum OLA (m2) required under Table B
Primary Primary
Out L d iv o in o g r T Out L Md A iv o r i e n o a g r T M living space living space a M r e a a x i u m s M a M npr u ed aa a m a x e x c i u mi r en m1 u rd / m oo u3 erro m 1 o r / efo 3 f 1 aos o/O vfp 3f se O a L p o sc A a L . f c A e O e m m oo Laa rr A y y ee b a mb av e ve e ac se oy . c s v bo . erveee dcr oevde red area under roof
Area (OLA) AArreeaass w withi tdhim deimnsieonnss ileosns sth laens 4sm th aandn 4m and not
(OLA) A reascn wootni ctshoon dslioidmliadetaetnedsd i wowniitthsh O lOeLsALs Aa rt eha nraeont n t4oom t taon cdo ntribute to required
n ot coOcnoLsnAtoril.bidutaet teod re wquiitrehd O OLLAA. are not to
c ontriOO b L uLA tA e t ot t ob o eb r aee c q cae ucs ics r iee blsd es f Oirbo LlmeA tfh .reo mpri mthaery p lirviimnga srpya clieving space
House
OLA to be accessible from the primary living space
House
Figure 13 - Dimensions and calculations for outdoor living areas (clause 5.3.1 C1.1)
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 62

PART C
1.0 THE GARDEN 64
2.0 THE BUILDING 72
3.0 NEIGHBOURLINESS 88
TABLE C PRIMARY CONTROLS 111
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 63

1.0 THE GARDEN
OBJECTIVES
1A To ensure dwellings are provided
with functional outdoor amenity and
outlook.
1B To support tree retention and re-
establishment of the urban tree canopy
with the aim of reducing the impact of
heat island effect.
1C To enable solar access and natural
ventilation to the dwelling through the
provision of open space.
1D To ensure that landscape design
responds to the key natural features
and landscape character of the
location.
1E To effectively manage stormwater,
reducing potential for flooding
and to reduce the impact of urban
development on natural water systems
and ecosystem health.
1.1 Private open space
1.2 Trees and landscaping
1.3 Communal open space
1.4 Water management and conservation
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 64

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
1.1 Private Open Space
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
design principles (P) requirements (C)
Primary garden area – single houses and grouped 3m minimum dimension for
P1.1.1 Dwellings are designed to have direct access to
dwellings only. a space to contribute to a
private open space which provides for entertaining, primary garden area
leisure and connection to the outdoors that is: C1.1.1 For single houses and grouped dwellings, a single
Minimum primary garden
consolidated primary garden area provided behind
i. of sufficient size and dimension to be area (m2) in Table 1.1a
the primary street setback, in accordance with
functional and usable for the intended number
Table 1.1a.
of dwelling occupants; Area with a dimension less
Table 1.1a Primary garden area requirements than 3m does not
ii. is sited, oriented and designed for occupant contribute to primary
amenity, including consideration of solar garden area calculations
access and natural ventilation appropriate to Minimum the climatic region; and Site area primary garden Maximum Minimum Primary garden area to have
permanent direct connection to the
iii. capable of use in conjunction with a primary (m2) area roof cover1 dimension2 primary living space
living space of the dwelling. (m2 per dwelling)
P1.1.2 Private open space allows for sufficient uncovered Greater
40
area to: than 220 One-third of
the primary
i. permit winter sun and natural ventilation into 191-220 35 garden area
the dwelling; and
provided
161-190 30
ii. provide for soft landscaping, including the 3m
planting of a tree(s) and deep soil area.
P1.1.3 Balconies balance the need for outlook, solar 131-160 25 0m2
access and natural ventilation with: (open to the
100-130 20 sky)
i. visual privacy considerations;
ii. acoustic and noise impacts; and Site area rounded up to the nearest whole number.
iii. local climatic considerations such as high
1 Permanent roof cover excludes minor projections (eaves).
winds.
2 Minimum dimension refers to the minimum length and width of
the primary garden area. Refer to Figure 1.1a for dimensions
and calculations of primary garden areas.
Related elements
- 1.2 Trees and landscaping
- 1.3 Communal open space
- 2.2 Solar access and natural ventilation
- 3.1 Site cover
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 65
ecaps
gnivil
yramirP
3m min.
C/A
clothes
drying
Figure 1.1a Primary garden area minimum dimensions

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
1.1 Private Open Space
(cont.)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply C1.1.4 Balconies are to be unscreened for at least 25% of the
design principles (P) requirements (C) total perimeter of the balcony (refer Figure 1.1c).
C1.1.2 Notwithstanding C1.1.1, for grouped dwellings with Note: Provisions of element 3.10 Visual Privacy apply.
P1.1.4 Increasing the area of communal open space a site area of 161m2 or greater, the required primary
commensurate with a decrease in private open garden area in accordance with Table 1.1a may be Table 1.1b Private open space requirements
space may be appropriate where there is an explicit reduced by 10m2, where a secondary ground level
intent to facilitate communal living and it can be private open space is provided with: Dwelling Minimum private open Minimum private
demonstrated that the communal open space: size space area open space
i. a minimum area of 10m2 and minimum dimension
(per dwelling) dimension
i. is of high amenity and provided with quality of 3m (refer Figure 1.1b);
landscaping; ii. uncovered and open to the sky (excluding minor Studio / 1 8m2 2m
bedroom
ii. is easily accessible and equitable for all projections); and
dwellings within the development; and iii. an additional small tree provided in addition to 2 bedrooms 10m2 2.4m
iii. meets the needs of the occupants and the minimum tree requirements of Table 1.2a. 3 or more
12m2 2.4m
provides opportunities for social interaction. bedrooms
Private open space and balconies Ground floor
15m2 3m
dwelling
C1.1.3 Multiple dwellings to provide a minimum of one private
open space area provided for the exclusive use of each When calculating the extent of private open space for multiple
multiple dwelling in accordance with Table 1.1b. dwellings, exclude service areas such as bin storage, clothes
drying, air conditioning units and the like.
25% unscreened
A
primary Balcony B
garden D 1.6m high fixed
area screen
C
25% unscreened
A
secondary Balcony
private open D B
space
Screened
C
Unscreened
Minimum area of 10m2 Note:
Boundary perimeter length = A+ B + C + D
Minimum dimension for a space to contribute to a
Minimum 25% of balcony perimeter to be unscreened
secondary private open space
Total balcony perimeter to include sides that abut building walls
Figure 1.1Abre aS weitcho a nddimaernys iporni vleastse th oanp 3emn dsopeasc neot m coinntirmibuutme
to sedcoimndeanrys piorivnast e (ogpreonu sppeacde dcawlceullalitniognss) Figure 1.1c Extent of screening to private open space
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 66

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
11..22 TTrreeeess aanndd LLaannddssccaappiinngg
DESIGN PRINCIPLES
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
design principles (P)
requirements (C)
P1.2.1 Site planning allows for:
Landscaping
i. site responsive and sustainable landscape
C1.2.1 Development to provide a minimum 15% soft
design; and
landscaping per site with a minimum dimension
ii. the retention of existing trees on the subject of 1m (refer Figure 1.2a).
site and adjoining properties.
C1.2.2 The primary street setback area is to provide a
P1.2.2 Provision of trees and high quality landscaping:
minimum 30% soft landscaping (Figure 1.2b).
i. enhances the built form, streetscape and
C1.2.3 The communal street (including any adjoining
pedestrian amenity, as viewed from the
setbacks) and communal open space is
street;
landscaped and provided with adequate lighting
ii. provides shade and amenity for communal to pathways and vehicle access areas.
streets and parking areas; and Single house Grouped Multiple
dwelling dwelling
iii. contributes to the visual appeal, comfort and
Tree Canopy
amenity of the development, in particular
private open space and communal open C1.2.4 A minimum number of trees to be planted in minimum 15% soft landscaping requirement per site
space and outlook from habitable rooms. accordance with Tables 1.2a and provided
with the required deep soil area per tree in
P1.2.3 Development provides sufficient deep soil area Figure 1.2a Soft landscaping minimum requirement per site
accordance with Table 1.2b.
to sustain healthy tree and plant growth, providing
for an increase in urban tree canopy over time, C1.2.5 For grouped and multiple dwellings, uncovered
and assist in managing the quantity and quality of at-grade car parking to include shade trees
stormwater. planted at a minimum ratio of one small tree for
every four car spaces, with the total required
number of trees to be rounded up to the nearest
whole number.
Note: These trees are in addition to the trees required
in accordance with C1.2.4.
Related elements
- 1.1 Private open space
- 1.3 Communal open space
- 2.3 Parking
- 3.3 Street setbacks
- 3.6 Streetscape
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 67

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
1.2 Trees and Landscaping
(cont.)
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
HOUSE
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
C1.2.6 For single houses and grouped dwellings, the soft C1.2.7 Where a significant existing tree is retained on
Street landscaping requirement of C1.2.1 may be reduced site, a tree protection zone is to be provided in
setback
to 10% where a significant existing tree is retained accordance with AS4970.
line
on site.
Note: The reduction of soft landscaping only applies Landscaping plan
to the site on which the tree is retained. A retained tree C1.2.8 For multiple dwellings, or five or more grouped
replaces a tree requirement in Table 1.2a on a like-for-like dwellings, provide a landscaping plan in accordance
Street setback area basis. with Appendix A3.
Minimum 30% soft landscaping
Paved areas excluded from soft landscaping Table 1.2a Minimum tree requirements
calculations
Figure 1.2b Soft landscaping requirement for street setback area Dwelling
Minimum tree requirements
Type
Single house
(per dwelling) 1 small tree Where the primary street setback is 1.5m or greater:
Primary garden area in - frontages less than 20m: 1 small tree in the primary street setback area;
accordance with C1.1.1 1 small tree or
Grouped
Primary garden area dwellings OR - frontages 20m or greater: 1 small tree in the primary street setback area
reduced in accordance (per dwelling) 2 small trees where primary garden area per 10m frontage1.
is reduced in accordance with C1.1.2
with C1.1.2
Secondary private Sites less than 700m2 1 medium tree and 2 small trees
open space
Multiple Sites of 700-1000m2 2 medium trees or 1 large tree and 1 small tree
Tree requirement dwellings
(Table 1.2a) (per lot)
2 medium trees or 1 large tree and 1 small tree
Sites greater than 1000m2 PLUS
1 medium tree per 400m2 in excess of 1000m2 or part thereof
Trees required within the street setback area are in addition to trees required per dwelling and where providing a secondary private open space.
1Frontage to be rounded down to the nearest 10m.
Tree requirements exclude ancillary dwellings.
tree in the primary
street setback area Refer to Figure 1.2c for grouped dwelling tree requirements.
Figure 1.2c Tree planting requirements
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 68

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
1.2 Trees and Landscaping
(cont.)
Large Tree: DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
>12m high Medium Tree:
8 - 12m high Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
Small Tree:
3 - 8m high Table 1.2b Tree size and deep soil area
> 9m 6 - 9m 2 - 6m Tree specifications
Tree Canopy Tree height at Minimum deep soil Minimum deep soil area
size diameter at maturity maturity area dimension
Small 2-6m 3-8m 9m2 1.5m
64m2 36m2 9m2
Medium 6-9m 8-12m 36m2 3m
min. dim. 6m min. dim. 3m min. dim. 1.5m
Large >9m >12m 64m2 6m
Required deep soil area per tree
Refer to Figure 1.2d for the provision of deep soil area for tree requirements.
Figure 1.2d Deep soil area requirements by tree size
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 69

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
1.3 Communal open space
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
Communal open space - multiple dwellings only C1.3.2 Communal open space is separated or screened
P1.3.1 Communal open space provides: from potential sources of noise and odour, such
C1.3.1 Communal open space is provided for multiple
as bins, vents, air conditioning units, and vehicle
i. good quality landscaping, trees and deep soil dwelling development in accordance with Table
circulation areas.
areas; 1.3a and the following:
ii. safe, accessible and high amenity spaces for C1.3.3 Communal open space is designed and oriented to
i. located in common property and behind the
social interaction; minimise the impacts of noise, odour, lightspill and
primary street setback line;
overlooking on the habitable rooms and private
iii. adequate space for its intended use and
ii. to be universally accessible to all occupants of open spaces within the site and of adjoining
function, proportionate to the number of
the development; and properties.
dwellings and number of occupants the
iii. exclusive to the residential component of
dwellings are designed to accommodate; and
mixed use development.
iv. adequate measures to mitigate against adverse
amenity impacts including visual, noise and
odour.
Table 1.3a Provision of communal open space
Minimum
Minimum communal accessible/hard Minimum communal
Development Maximum covered
open space landscape area open space
size roof area
requirement (included in overall dimension
requirement)
Up to 10 dwellings No requirement
More than 10 6m2 per dwelling up to 2m2 per dwelling up to 25% of each communal
4m
dwellings maximum 300m2 100m2 open space area
Communal open spaces can be co-located with deep soil areas, soft landscaping area and/or co-indoor communal spaces
Related elements
- 1.1 Private open space
- 1.2 Trees and landscaping
- 3.10 Visual privacy
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 70

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
1.4 Water management and conservation
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
design principles (P) requirements (C)
P1.4.1 Flooding risk is reduced to limit the impact of C1.4.1 Stormwater runoff draining from roofs, driveways,
major rainfall events. communal streets and other impervious
surfaces generated by a small rainfall event to be
P1.4.2 Stormwater is managed on site wherever
retained on site, with run-off directed to garden
possible either by containment or infiltration, as
areas, rainwater tanks and infiltration cells (e.g.
permitted by the soil and other site conditions,
soakwells), appropriate to climatic, local soil and
or otherwise appropriately treated to reduce
groundwater conditions.
the export of nutrients, sediments and other
pollutants, prior to off site discharge. C1.4.2 Notwithstanding C1.4.1, stormwater may be
directed to a district or local stormwater
P1.4.3 Development incorporates water sensitive urban
drainage system where required by the decision-
design mechanisms, including water conservation
maker due to climatic, local soil or groundwater
approaches and site appropriate stormwater
conditions.
collection, retention, treatment and reuse.
Related elements
- 1.2 Trees and landscaping
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 71

2.0 THE BUILDING
OBJECTIVES
2A To promote the development of a
range of housing options to suit the
needs of the community.
2B To optimise comfortable living, natural
ventilation and winter solar gain to
facilitate sustainable housing with
particular regard for place and local
climatic conditions.
2C To ensure dwellings have adequately
sized rooms and functional storage
space.
2D To support provision of well-
considered and designed car parking
that is appropriate to the location
and that minimises the impact on the
development and streetscape.
2E To ensure ancillary structures and
service areas are appropriately
designed, located and integrated into
the development.
INDOOR AMENITY FUNCTION HOUSING DIVERSITY
2.1 Size and layout of dwellings 2.3 Parking 2.7 Universal design
2.2 Solar access and natural ventilation 2.4 Waste management 2.8 Ancillary dwellings
2.5 Utilities 2.9 Small dwellings
2.6 Outbuildings 2.10 Housing on lots less than 100m2
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 72

Indoor amenity
2.1 Size and layout of dwellings
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
design principles (P) requirements (C)
P2.1.1 Dwellings have a primary living space that: Primary living space
i. is proportionate to the type and size of the C2.1.1 Each dwelling is to have one room that is the
dwelling and intended number of occupants; designated primary living space, and for multiple
ii. has a physical and visual relationship with the dwellings in areas coded R30 to R60, this primary
primary garden area, private open space and/ living space can accommodate a dimension of at
or public open space; and least 3.8m x 3.8m1 (refer Figure 2.1a).
iii. incorporates environmental design principles, 1Exclusive of built-in cabinetry along walls. 3.8m minimum
dimension
including passive solar design and appropriate
C2.1.2 For single house and grouped dwellings:
daylighting and shading, appropriate for the
climate. i. where the primary living space is provided on
P2.1.2 Ceiling heights and room dimensions provide for the ground floor, it is to have direct physical
well-proportioned spaces that facilitate good and visual access to the primary garden area;
natural ventilation and daylighting. or
ii. where the primary living space is provided on
P2.1.3 The size and layout of dwellings:
an upper floor, it is to have direct physical and
i. is functional with the ability to flexibly visual access to a private open space (such as
accommodate furniture; a balcony or rooftop terrace) in accordance Figure 2.1a Calculating primary living space
ii. is appropriate to the intended number of with Table 1.1b. minimum dimensions
occupants; and C2.1.3 For multiple dwellings, the primary living space is
iii. ensures functional, high amenity spaces. to have direct physical and visual access to private
open space in accordance with Table 1.1b.
P2.1.4 Development provides a mix of dwelling types,
sizes and configurations that cater for diverse C2.1.4 For multiple dwellings, the maximum depth1 of
household types and changing community a single aspect primary living space shall be a
demographics, appropriate to the existing and/or maximum three times (3x) the ceiling height (refer
future context of the locality. Figure 2.1b).
1Exclusive of built-in cabinetry along walls.
Note: Additional livings spaces (such as a second lounge
room) are not subject to the requirements of C2.1.1 –
C2.1.4
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 73
llaw
gnola
yrtenibac
ni-tliub
CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
extent of
primary living
space
Figure 2.1b Single aspect primary living space depth
and ceiling height
Related elements
- 1.1 Private Open Space
- 2.2 Solar access and natural ventilation
- 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
thgieh
gniliec
Maximum depth 3x ceiling height

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Indoor amenity
22..11 SSiizzee aanndd llaayyoouutt ooff ddwweelllliinnggss
(cont.)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
Habitable rooms Table 2.1a Minimum dwelling size requirements for multiple
dwellings
P2.1.5 Each dwelling provides adequate, conveniently C2.1.5 For multiple dwellings, bedrooms have a minimum
located storage for large items that are: internal floor area of 9m2 and can accommodate a
minimum dimension of 2.7m x 2.7m (refer Figure 2.1c). Dwelling Size Minimum internal floor area
i. proportionate to the size of the dwelling and
intended number of occupants; and Minimum area is inclusive of built-in robes and cabinetry,
ii. integrated into the design of the building and/ however the minimum dimension excludes built-in robes Studio 37m2
or screened from view to ensure that it is not and cabinetry.
visually intrusive when viewed from the street. 1 bed 47m2
C2.1.6 Measured from the finished floor level to the ceiling
P2.1.6 The siting and layout of dwellings minimizes level, minimum ceiling heights for multiple dwellings
potential impacts on amenity and provide are: 2 bed x 1 bath 67m2
appropriate visual and acoustic privacy to
i. 2.65m for habitable rooms; and
habitable rooms by: 2 bed x 2 bath 72m2
ii. 2.4m for non-habitable rooms.
i. locating, orienting or setting back habitable
All other ceilings are to meet the requirements of the
rooms; 3 bed x 1 bath 90m2
NCC.
ii. providing adequate landscape screening as a
buffer; and/or 3 bed x 2 bath 95m2
Dwelling size and mix
iii. providing acoustic treatments to reduce noise
transfer. C2.1.7 Multiple dwellings are to provide minimum internal An additional 3m2 shall be provided for designs that include an
floor areas in accordance with Table 2.1a. additional separate toilet, and 5m2 for designs that include an
additional bathroom.
Note: No dwelling size requirements apply to single
houses and grouped dwellings. Minimum internal floor area excludes storerooms where they are
accessed external to the dwelling.
C2.1.8 Where more than 10 multiple dwellings are
proposed, no more than 80 per cent of dwellings
have the same number of bedrooms.
2.7m minimum dimension
9m2 minimum internal floor area
Figure 2.1c Calculating bedroom minimum dimensions
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 74

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Indoor amenity
2.1 Size and layout of dwellings
(cont.)
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
Storage Table 2.1b Storage requirements
C2.1.9 Each dwelling has exclusive use of a dedicated,
Minimum
weatherproof storage area in accordance with Minimum
Dwelling Minimum storage storage
Table 2.1b, that is located behind the primary street storage
Minimum Size area area
storage area in setback and accessible via an opening that does not area height
accordance open inwards. dimension
with Table 2.1b Studio / 1
C2.1.10 Notwithstanding C2.1.9, minimum storage area
bedroom 3m2
dimension can be reduced to 1m where:
dwelling
i. it can be demonstrated that an adjacent 2
circulation space achieves 0.9m clearance; bedroom 4m2
ii. the door or opening is located on the greater dwelling 1.5m1 2.1m
dimension and is openable for a minimum 80 Single houses and
per cent of the length; and 3+ bed grouped dwellings:
iii. the minimum storage area is still achieved (refer bedroom 4m2
Figure 2.1d). dwelling Multiple dwellings:
5m2
car parking width 1m Managing impacts on amenity Minimum dimension refers to the minimum length and width of the
min storage area.
C2.1.11 Major openings to ground floor multiple dwellings
facing directly onto car parking areas and/or Storage can be co-located within a garage or carport but must provide
Door located on greater non-residential components of a mixed use a dedicated area.
dimension and 80% openable development are set back a minimum 3m and are
designed to ensure visual privacy and manage noise
Dimensions and areas are exclusive of services, plant, utilities, bin
storage, bicycle parking and fixtures and facilities.
intrusion and light spill.
X m2
C2.1.12 For multiple dwellings, potential noise sources such 1Minimum dimension can be reduced in accordance with C2.1.10
as garage doors, service areas, active communal
2.1m open space, communal waste storage areas
min
and non-residential components of a mixed use
development are not located within;
i. 1m to the external wall of habitable rooms; and
ii. 3m of a window to a bedroom.
1m min
CIRCULATION SPACE
0.9m min
Figure 2.1d Minimum storage dimensions with adjacent
circulation space
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 75

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Indoor amenity
2.2 Solar access and natural ventilation
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
design principles (P) requirements (C)
Min dimension= 0.5 x
P2.2.1 In climate zones 4, 5 and 6 the development is Windows and openings wall height
sited, oriented and designed to optimise winter C2.2.1 Every habitable room has a minimum of one
solar gain whilst limiting summer sunlight into: openable external window:
i. the primary living space and habitable rooms; i. visible from all parts of the room; Courtyard
and
ii. with an aggregate glazed area not less than 10
ii. private open spaces, including the primary per cent of the habitable room internal floor
garden area; area; and
while balancing site constraints, outlook and views iii. comprising a minimum of 50 per cent of Minimum courtyard area of 4m2
of significance. transparent glazing.
P2.2.2 Windows to habitable rooms are designed and Note: 3.10 Visual privacy provisions may still apply. Figure 2.2a Courtyard minimum dimensions
positioned to optimize daylight, natural ventilation (multiple dwellings)
and outlook, while maintaining a reasonable level of C2.2.2 Where a courtyard is the only source of daylight
visual privacy. to a habitable room, the courtyard must be
uncovered and open to the sky1 with a:
P2.2.3 Dwellings optimize natural ventilation to
habitable rooms (and bathrooms where possible) i. minimum area of 4m2 (refer Figure 2.2a); and
that is responsive to site and local climatic ii. for multiple dwellings a minimum dimension
conditions. of 0.5 times the wall height.
1 Excludes minor projections
C2.2.3 Bathrooms located on external walls (excluding
boundary walls) must have a minimum of one
openable window for natural ventilation.
Related elements
- 1.1 Private Open Space
- 2.1 Size and layout of dwellings
- 3.2 Building height
- 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
- 3.10 Visual privacy
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 76

Indoor amenity
2.2 Solar access and natural ventilation
(cont.)
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 77
m0.3
muminim
primary
garden area
covered area
in excess of
2m depth
ot
pu
m0.2
CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
N DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
W N Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
N E requirements (C)
Orientation of major openings
2The centre line of the minimum 3m x 3m area must be
Note: No orientation requirements apply to primary living contained within the glazed area of the major opening
W E areas located in climate zones 1 and 3. (Figure 2.2d).
C2.2.4 For single houses1 and grouped dwellings in climate
zones 4,5 and 6, a major opening to the primary
i. a minimum of 70 per cent of dwellings have a
living space is oriented between north-west
primary living space that achieves at least 2
SW SE and east in accordance with Figure 2.2b, with an hours direct sunlight between 9am and 3pm on
adjoining uncovered open area with:
no direct sunlight 21 June; and
S i. a minimum dimension 3m x 3m2 in ii. a maximum of 15 per cent of dwellings in a
Achieves deemed-to-comply (C2.2.4) accordance with Figure 2.2c; and building receiving no direct sunlight to the
Design principle for single houses and grouped ii. the exception of shading devices up to 2m primary living space between 9am and 3pm on
dwellings to achieve 2 hours solar access depth. 21 June.
Orientation of major opening to primary living space
Figure 2.2b Orientation of major opening to the
primary living space
major
minimum 3.0m
opening
E-NW
Figure 2.2c Minimum dimension of an uncovered open area Figure 2.2d Adjoining uncovered open areas
yradnuob
tol
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
C2.2.5 For multiple dwellings in climate zones 4, 5 and 6:
1Until 10 April 2030, this provision does not apply to
single houses located in areas designated with a
residential density code of R50 or higher within a
structure plan and/ or local development plan that
was approved prior to 10 April 2024.
adjoining uncovered adjoining uncovered open
adjoining uncovered open open area to be clear area may extend beyond
area to be clear of walls of lot boundaries street boundary
c c
L L
street
c boundary
L
eave or shading
device up to 2m in
depth
major major
opening opening
adjoining uncovered
open area

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Function
2.3 Parking
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
design principles (P) requirements (C)
P2.3.1 Siting and the extent of parking does not dominate Occupant parking
the development or streetscape and responds to
C2.3.1 Occupant car parking is provided on site and in
the context and local character by:
accordance with Table 2.3a.
i. supporting the efficient use of the site; and
C2.3.2 Motorcycle/scooter parking for multiple dwellings
ii. minimising the extent of paving for parking and is provided on site in accordance with Table 2.3a.
vehicle access.
C2.3.3 Car spaces and manoeuvring areas designed and
P2.3.2 Adequate parking is provided for various modes
provided in accordance with AS2890.1.
of transport, including bicycles, motorcycles,
scooters and cars, that has regard to the following
considerations: Visitor parking
i. the proximity of the proposed development C2.3.4 Visitor car parking for grouped and multiple
to public transport, activity centres, areas of dwellings is provided on site and in accordance
amenity and other facilities; with Table 2.3a.
ii. the type, size and number of dwellings; and C2.3.5 Visitor car parking spaces to be:
iii. the availability of on-street and other off-
i. marked and clearly signposted as dedicated
street parking.
for visitor use only;
P2.3.3 Parking spaces are designed for flexibility and
ii. located on common property; and
adaptability having regard for:
iii. connected to building entries via a continuous
i. the needs of occupants, including path of travel.
consideration of universally accessible
parking spaces; and
ii. the ability to use the space for alternative
purposes.
Related elements
- 3.3 Street setbacks
- 3.6 Streetscape
- 3.7 Access
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 78

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Function
2.3 Parking
(cont.)
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
Table 2.3a Car parking requirements
Minimum parking space(s) Maximum garage and carport parking
Location A
(per dwelling) (per dwelling)
Ancillary dwelling 0 1
Studio and 1 bedroom dwelling 0 1
2 bedroom dwelling 0 2
3+ bedroom dwelling 1 2
Occupant car parking
Minimum parking space(s) Maximum garage and carport parking
Location B
(per dwelling) (per dwelling)
Ancillary dwelling 0 1
Studio and 1 bedroom dwelling 1 1
2 bedroom dwelling 1 2
3+ bedroom dwelling 1 2
Number of dwellings Minimum Parking
0-4 dwellings No visitor car parking required
Visitor carparking 5-8 dwellings 1
9-12 dwellings 2
13 or more dwellings 3, plus 1 additional space per four dwellings or part thereof
0-19 dwellings No motorcycle/scooter parking required
Motorcycle /scooter parking
(multiple dwellings only)
20 or more dwellings One motorcycle/scooter space for every 10 car parking spaces
Minimum parking applies to all types of parking on site including (but not limited to) garages, carports, uncovered spaces, undercroft and basement parking.
Maximum carparking applies to garages and carports. Additional parking may be provided as uncovered spaces, undercroft or basement parking.
LOCATION A – includes all land located within:
- 800m walkable catchment of a train station on a high-frequency rail route;
- 250m walkable catchment of a transit stop:
o on a high-frequency transit route; or
o that has multiple transit routes, that when combined stop every 15 minutes during weekday peak periods (7am –9am and 5pm – 7pm); or
- the defined boundaries of an activity centre.
LOCATION B – includes all land that is not within Location A.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 79

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Function
2.3 Parking
(cont.)
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
1200
Bicycle parking
1200 C2.3.6 Bicycle parking is provided on site12 a00nd in accordance with Table 2.3b and Figure 2.3a.
Table 2.3b Minimum bicycle parking requirements
Minimum number of bicycle spaces
1800 1800 500
Single houses Grouped dwellings Multiple dwellings
500
Occupant bicycle parking No minimum requirement 0.5 x the total number of dwellings
0-9 dwellings No visitor bicycle parking required
1200 Visitor bicycle
parking 10 or more
No visitor bicycle parking required 0.1 x the total number of dwellings
dwellings
1200 1200
Where the bicycle parking calculation results in a fraction of a space, the requirement is to be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
1800 1800 500
500
1200
1200 1200
1800 1800 500
500
Figure 2.3a Bicycle parking
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 80

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Function
2.4 Waste Management
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
C2.4.1 A dedicated and accessible space is provided to C2.4.3 Waste storage bins are screened from view from
P2.4.1 Sufficient space for waste storage is provided that: accommodate the required number and type of communal areas, the street, public open space, and
waste storage bins for the development, in line other areas accessible to the public.
i. is convenient for residents;
with requirements of the local government and
ii. has collection areas which can be accessed by separate from any waste storage areas associated C2.4.4 Where a communal waste storage area is provided,
service vehicles; and with the non-residential component of a mixed use it is to be separated or screened from major
openings, primary garden areas and communal
iii. can be secured and managed where required. development.
open space to avoid the adverse impact of potential
P2.4.2 Waste management facilities are located and C2.4.2 Where multiple dwellings, or five or more grouped sources of noise and odour.
screened to minimise negative impacts on the dwellings are proposed, a waste management plan
streetscape, communal areas, building entries, to the satisfaction of the decision-maker, is to be
major openings, and the local amenity. provided.
Related elements
- 2.1 Size and layout of dwellings
- 3.6 Streetscape
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 81

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Function
2.5 Utilities
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
C2.5.1 Service utilities are designed and located such that C2.5.2 Functional utilities (with the exception of solar
P2.5.1 The site is serviced with utilities that that are they: collectors and electric vehicle charging):
fit for purpose and meet current performance
i. are accessible and can be safely maintained; i. are located behind the primary street setback
and access requirements of service providers,
addressing access, maintenance and safety ii. maintain clear sightlines for vehicle access; and and not visible from the primary street;
considerations. iii. integrated into the design of the development ii. are designed to integrate with the
and/or screened from view of the street. development; and
P2.5.2 Utilities balance operational requirements with the
iii. are located and/or screened so that they are
need to minimise: Note: Where required by the NCC, fire service
not visually obtrusive and minimise the impact
infrastructure is located to be visible, and with
i. visual, noise, heat and air quality impacts on of noise sources to habitable rooms and
unobstructed access for its required use during an
habitable rooms and private open space private open space both on the development
emergency.
both on the development site and adjoining site and adjoining properties.
properties; and
C2.5.3 Where provided, solar collectors are located on
ii. the visual impact on the streetscape. the roof or other parts of buildings, and prioritise
functional performance.
Related elements
- 1.1 Private open space
- 3.3 Street setbacks
- 3.6 Streetscape
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 82

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Function
2.6 Outbuildings
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
C2.6.1 Any outbuilding: C2.6.2 Notwithstanding C2.6.1(iii), where an outbuilding
P2.6.1 Outbuildings do not negatively impact the is designed to be compatible with the colour and
i. individually or collectively does not exceed
amenity for residents of the development, materials of the dwelling on the same site, the wall
60m2 per site;
adjoining properties or the streetscape. height may be increased to 3.5m.
ii. is not located within the primary or secondary
P2.6.2 Siting and size of outbuildings does not street setback area; Outbuildings will need to comply with the NCC
compromise the ability to provide adequate requirements, including but not limited to fire separation.
iii. does not exceed a wall height of 3m;
primary garden area, soft landscaping, trees and
deep soil areas. iv. does not exceed a ridge height of 4.2m;
v. is set back or built up to lot boundaries in
accordance with C3.4.1, C3.4.4 or C3.4.5;
vi. does not exceed the maximum allowable site
cover in accordance with C3.1.1;
vii. does not reduce the minimum primary garden
area required in accordance with C1.1.1;
viii. does not reduce the minimum soft landscaping
required in accordance with C1.2.1; and
ix. does not reduce the minimum tree requirement
and associated deep soil area in accordance
with C1.2.4.
Related elements
- 1.1 Private open space
- 1.2 Trees and landscaping
- 3.1 Site cover
- 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 83

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Housing diversity
2.7 Universal design
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
C2.7.1 Where 10 or more grouped or multiple dwellings C2.7.2 Accessible dwellings that seek to apply the gold
P2.7.1 Development provides accessible housing are proposed, a minimum 20 per cent1 of all level universal design site area variation as per Part
or adaptable dwellings that are proportionate dwellings are: D, C1.1.6 or C1.1.7 shall;
in number to the size of the development and
i. designed and constructed to a minimum silver i. be designed and constructed in accordance
intended occupancy.
level universal design in accordance with A4 with the gold level universal design
P2.7.2 Accessible housing and adaptable dwellings Universal design requirements, or requirements of A4 Universal design
provide housing options for people with disabilities ii. certified Livable Housing Australia to a minimum requirements, or are certified Livable
and/or limited or reduced mobility, facilitate ageing silver level of performance. Housing Australia to a minimum gold level of
in place, and are designed in accordance with the performance; and
universal design requirements: Note: No universal design requirements apply for single
ii. have a maximum internal floor area of:
houses or grouped and multiple dwellings development
i. of the Livable Housing Design Guidelines; with less than 10 dwellings. a. in the case of single houses and grouped
ii. of the Australian Building Codes Board dwellings – 110m2; or
All other provisions of the R-Codes still apply.
Livable Housing Design Standard (2022); b. in the case of multiple dwellings – 90m2.
iii. of AS4299; and/or 1Where calculations result in a fraction of a dwelling, the Note: All other provisions of the R-Codes still apply.
requirement is to be rounded up to the nearest whole
iv. to suit the specific needs of the occupant.
number.
Related elements
- Part D – 1.1 Site area
- 2.1 Size and layout of dwellings
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 84

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Housing diversity
2.8 Ancillary dwellings
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
C2.8.1 An ancillary dwelling in accordance with Table 2.8a, Table 2.8a Ancillary dwelling requirements
P2.8.1 The size of an ancillary dwelling allows for provided that it:
adequate internal amenity whilst remaining
Ancillary Maximum Maximum
i. does not preclude the primary dwelling from
incidental to the primary dwelling. Dwelling type dwelling ancillary internal
meeting the maximum site cover and the
type dwellings floor area
P2.8.2 Ancillary dwellings allow for diversity of housing minimum required private open space, soft
without having an adverse impact on the amenity landscaping, trees and deep soil area; and All
of: ii. complies with the following design elements as Single house and types of
1 per site 70m2
i. adjoining properties; relevant: grouped dwellings ancillary
dwellings
ii. streetscape and local character; and 2.2 Solar access and natural ventilation
iii. the primary dwelling. 2.3 Parking 1-19 1 per
70m2
2.5 Utilities dwellings development
3.1 Site cover Dual key
Multiple 2 per
3.2 Building height dwelling
3.3 Street setbacks dwellings 20 or only development
more and 1 per 70m2
3.4 Lot boundary setbacks dwellings additional 10
3.5 Site works and retaining walls dwellings1
3.6 Streetscape
3.7 Access 1Rounded down to the nearest 10 dwellings
3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites
3.10 Visual privacy
Note: The above provisions relate to the ancillary dwelling portion of the development, with the exception of 3.1 Site cover, 3.4
Lot boundary setbacks and 3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites which would need to be assessed in combination with the primary
dwelling. The primary dwelling would still need to comply with all relevant provisions of the R-Codes.
Related elements
- 1.1 Private open space
- 1.2 Trees and landscaping
- 3.1 Site cover
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 85

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Housing diversity
2.9 Small dwellings
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
design principles (P) requirements (C)
P2.9.1 The design of small dwellings ensures adequate Small Dwellings – Part D, C1.1.6 and C1.1.7 applies and
indoor and outdoor amenity for occupants. provides a site area concession
P2.9.2 Alternative and affordable housing options are C2.9.1 Small dwellings subject to the site area concession
provided for small households where it can be of Part D, C1.1.6 or C1.1.7 shall comply with the
demonstrated that the development: following:
i. is located in an area that has good access to i. for single houses and grouped dwellings, a
public transport, public open space, local maximum internal dwelling floor area of 70m2,
retailing, and other community infrastructure; or for multiple dwellings a maximum internal
ii. responds to a demand for small dwellings in floor area of 60m2;
the locality which may be recognised in the ii. parking provided in accordance with
local planning framework; Table 2.3a; and
iii. provides an adequate mix of dwelling sizes; iii. all other provisions of the R-Codes.
and Related elements
iv. is consistent with the existing and/or future - Part D – 1.1 Site area
intended streetscape and local character.
- 2.1 Size and layout of dwellings
2.10 Housing on lots less than 100m2
Housing on lots less than 100m2 – applies to single houses and grouped dwellings in areas coded R100-SL only.
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
design principles (P) requirements (C)
P2.10.1 Housing on lots less than 100m2 are integrated with C2.10.1 Single houses and grouped dwellings in areas
the streetscape and surrounding development coded R100-SL are to comply with the following:
and does not form the predominant housing type in
i. dwellings to front a primary street, secondary
a street.
street, or public right-of-way; and
P2.10.2 Housing on lots less than 100m2 are designed ii. all provisions of the R-Codes to apply, subject
to a high standard to contribute to the desired to the modifications in Table 2.10a.
streetscape character and do not adversely Related elements
impact the amenity of adjoining properties. - Part D – 1.1 Site area
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 86

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Housing diversity
2.10 Housing on lots less than 100m2
(cont.)
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
Table 2.10a Modified provisions for housing on lots less than 100m2
R-Code Element (Part C) Clauses Modified provision
C1.1.1 Dwellings to provide:
1.1 Private open space - a single consolidated uncovered primary garden area with a minimum area of 15m2 and a minimum dimension of 3m; OR
- one private open space (such as a balcony or roof terrace) in accordance with Table 1.1b.
C1.2.1 Landscaping
C1.2.2 - minimum of 10% of the site to be provided as soft landscaping, with a minimum dimension of 1m; and
1.2 Trees and landscaping C1.2.4 - no minimum landscaping of the street setback area.
Trees
- no minimum tree requirements
C2.1.6 Measured from the finished floor level to the ceiling level, minimum ceiling heights for dwellings are:
- 2.65m for habitable rooms; and
2.1 Size and layout
- 2.4m for non-habitable rooms.
All other ceilings meet the requirements of the NCC.
3.1 Site cover C3.1.1
Maximum site cover of 85%
C3.2.1 Minimum two storey building height.
3.2 Building height
Maximum four storey building height in accordance with Table 3.2a.
C3.3.1 Primary or secondary street
- 1m primary and secondary street setback
3.3 Street setbacks Right-of-way
- 0.5m setback to adjoining right-of-way; and
- nil street setback for upper floors
C3.4.4 Boundary walls permitted:
3.4 Lot boundary setbacks1 - behind the street setback; and
- to a maximum boundary wall height of 13m.
C3.6.7
3.6 Streetscape Street fences to not exceed 900mm in height.
3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites1 All No overshadowing requirements apply.
3.10 Visual privacy1 All No visual privacy requirements apply.
1Where development abuts an adjoining property not coded R100-SL, the modified provisions of Table 2.10a do not apply.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 87

3.0 NEIGHBOURLINESS
OBJECTIVES
3A To deliver amenity and liveability
for residents of new development
and adjoining properties, with regard
to sunlight, solar access, natural
ventilation and visual privacy.
3B To ensure that development is
appropriately scaled, particularly in
respect to building bulk and height,
and is sympathetic to the scale of the
street and surrounding buildings, or
for precincts undergoing a transition,
the desired future character of the
area as identified in the local planning
framework.
3C To contribute to place responsive,
attractive streetscapes.
3D To ensure that safe, legible access is
provided to dwellings for pedestrians,
bicycle riders and vehicles.
BUILT FORM AND CHARACTER COMMUNITY
3.1 Site cover 3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites
3.2 Building height 3.10 Visual privacy
3.3 Street setbacks
3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
3.5 Site works and retaining walls
3.6 Streetscape
3.7 Access
3.8 Retaining existing dwellings
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 88

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Built form and character
3.1 Site cover
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
design principles (P) requirements (C)
P3.1.1 The site cover of the development is suitable for C3.1.1 Development on each site does not exceed the
its context to: maximum site cover percentages of Table 3.1a.
i. achieve appropriate building bulk on the site, Table 3.1a Maximum site cover requirements
consistent with the intent of the applicable
R30 R35 R40 R50 R60 R80
density code and/or as outlined in the local
planning framework; 60% 60% 65% 65% 70% 70%
ii. ensure sufficient outdoor space for R80 Code standards apply to single houses and grouped
landscaping including trees and deep soil dwellings in areas coded R100, R160 and R-AC.
areas;
iii. ensure adequate solar access and natural
ventilation into the dwelling;
iv. provide opportunities for residents to use
space external to the dwelling for outdoor
pursuits and access within and around the site;
v. provide space for utilities and essential
facilities; and
vi. be compatible with the existing and/or desired
streetscape and local character.
Related elements
- 1.1 Private open space
- 1.2 Trees and landscaping
- 2.2 Solar access and natural ventilation
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 89

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Built form and character
3.2 Building height
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
C3.2.1 Building height complies with Table 3.2a.
P3.2.1 Building height, bulk and scale is appropriate for
the existing and/or desired future streetscape
and local character of the area and nearby Table 3.2a Maximum building heights
development.
Maximum Concealed or skillion roof Pitched, hipped or gabled roof
P3.2.2 Building height is considerate of the impact
R-Coding number of
on the amenity of adjoining properties or the storeys Maximum building height Maximum height of wall Maximum total building height
streetscape, including road reserves and public
open space reserves, and where appropriate
R30 - 40 2 8m 7m 10m
maintains:
i. adequate solar access into indoor and R50 - 60 3 11m 10m 13m
outdoor active habitable space and solar
collectors; and R80 4 14m 13m 16m
ii. access to views of significance.
R80 Code standards apply to single houses, grouped dwellings in areas coded R100, R160 and R-AC
Refer Figure 3.2a for building height and natural ground level measurement guidance.
height limit line Refer Figure 3.2b for wall height and total building height guidance.
H This table provides a maximum building height only and development will need to consider other elements such as 3.9 Solar access for
H adjoining sites.
H
natural
ground level Where roof top terraces are proposed, the concealed or skillion roof controls apply.
deemed natural
ground level
Notes
The height of a building is taken as the highest point at any part of the
development immediately above natural ground level.
Where natural ground level varies across the site, deemed natural
ground level is to be used.
Figure 3.2a Measuring building height and natural ground level
Related elements
- 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
- 3.6 Streetscape
- 3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites Figure 3.2b Measurement of total building height
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 90
thgieh
llaW
thgieh
gnidliub
latoT yradnuob
tol
yradnuob
tol
yradnuob
tol
Concealed roof
gnidliub
latoT thgieh
gnidliub
latoT thgieh
Pitched and hipped roof Skillion roof
thgieh
llaW
thgieh
gnidliub
latoT
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Gable roof
natural ground level natural ground level natural ground level natural ground level

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Built form and character
3.3 Street setbacks
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
Setback of buildings Table 3.3a Minimum setback of buildings from the street
P3.3.1 Buildings are set back from street boundaries an
appropriate distance to ensure they: C3.3.1 Buildings are set back from the street boundary in Street type R30 R35 R40 R50 R60 R80
accordance with Table 3.3a.
i. are consistent with the existing or future
Minor projections, such as chimneys, eaves, Primary street 4m 4m 3m 2m 2m 2m
streetscape and local character;
window hoods and other architectural features, are
ii. provide sufficient space for tree planting and acceptable provided they do not project more than Secondary street 1.5m 1.5m 1m 1m 1m 1m
other landscaping, as well as community
0.75m into the street setback.
interaction; Adjoining
0.5m
iii. provide adequate privacy to the dwellings; Note: Minor projections will need to comply with the NCC communal street
requirements.
iv. accommodate site planning requirements such Adjoining laneway
as parking and utilities; and C3.3.2 Notwithstanding C3.3.1, the following reductions are or right-of way
where it is the 2m
permitted:
v. allow safety clearances for easements for primary street to
essential service corridors and sightlines. i. in areas coded R30, R35 and R40, the primary the dwelling 1
P3.3.2 Buildings mass and form that: street setback line may be reduced by up to 1m Adjoining laneway
0.5m
for a total of 30 per cent of the frontage width or right-of way
i. uses design features to affect the size and
(refer Figure 3.3a); and/or
scale of the building; R80 Code standards apply to single houses and grouped
ii. for a porch, verandah, unenclosed balcony or dwellings in areas coded R100, R160 and RAC.
ii. provide the opportunity for building
equivalent the primary street setback may be
articulation, such as well-defined entries, reduced up to half the required primary street Where road widening is required, street setbacks are to be
varying setbacks across the building width, setback as specified in Table 3.3a, up to the full calculated from the adjusted street boundary.
verandahs, porches and balconies;
building width (refer Figure 3.3b).
1 Does not apply to ancillary dwellings.
iii. uses appropriate minor projections that do not
C3.3.3 Buildings set back from a corner lot truncation
detract from the character of the streetscape;
boundary in accordance with the secondary street
iv. minimises the proportion of the façade at setback line in Table 3.3a.
ground level taken up by building services,
vehicle entries, parking supply, blank walls,
servicing infrastructure access, meters and the
like; and
v. positively contributes to the prevailing or
future development context and streetscape
as outlined in the local planning framework.
Related elements
- 1.2 Trees and landscaping
- 2.3 Parking
- 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
- 3.6 Streetscape
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 91

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Built form and character
3.3 Street setbacks
(cont.)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
Setback of garages and carports C3.3.5 Carports are set back from the primary street
P3.3.3 Garages and/or carports are set back to: boundary in accordance with Table 3.3a. This
C3.3.4 Garages are set back from the primary street
setback may be reduced by up to 50 per cent
i. contribute positively to the streetscape and boundary in accordance with Table 3.3b.
where:
appearance of dwellings;
Table 3.3b Setback of garages from the primary street
ii. maintain clear sightlines along the street, to i. the carport is set back from the lot boundary in
not obstruct views of dwellings from the street accordance with C3.4.3;
R-Coding Primary street setback
and vice versa; and ii. the carport width does not exceed the
iii. ensure vehicle parking on a driveway only R30-R35 Minimum 5.0m1 requirement of C3.6.6;
occurs where space permits and does not (Refer Figure 3.3c) iii. the carport is free of walls (excluding pillar and
impede on any existing or planned adjoining posts with a horizontal dimension of 450mm
R40 and above In accordance with Table 3.3a
pedestrian, cycle, or dual-use path. by 450mm or less) for all portions that project
1 The garage setback from the primary street may be reduced forward of the primary street setback line; and
to 4.5m where an existing or planned footpath, shared path iv. the construction allows an unobstructed view
or road alignment is located more than 1m from the street between the dwelling and the street, right-of-
boundary. way or equivalent.
C3.3.6 Garages and carports are set back from a
secondary street, right-of way and communal
street in accordance with Table 3.3a.
HOUSE HOUSE
Garage
Street
Street setback
setback line line
max. 1m
50% of Xm
(C3.3.2 i) reduction min. 5.0m
Xm in street
(C3.3.2 ii)
Xm
max 30% (Table 3.3a) setback (Table 3.3a)
(C3.3.2 i)
max 100% building width
frontage width
reduction in primary street setback porch, verandah, unenclosed balcony or equivalent
Figure 3.3a Reduction in primary street setback for Figure 3.3b Reduction in primary street setback for porch, Figure 3.3c Setback of garage from the primary street
R30, R35 and R40 coded lots verandah and unenclosed balcony
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 92

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Built form and character
3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
Lot boundary setbacks Table 3.4a Lot boundary setbacks
P3.4.1 Lot boundary setbacks reinforce the location’s
streetscape character and are consistent with the C3.4.1 Buildings are set back from lot boundaries in Minimum lot boundary
accordance with Table 3.4a. Wall height1
existing or desired built form local character. setback
Refer Figure 3.4a, b and c.
P3.4.2 The setback of development from lot boundaries Minor projections, such as chimneys, eaves, Up to 3.5m 1m
provides a transition between sites with different
window hoods and other architectural features, are
land uses or intensity of development.
acceptable provided they do not project more than 3.6 – 7m 1.5m
P3.4.3 Buildings are set back from lot boundaries or 0.75m into the lot boundary setback.
adjacent buildings on the same lot to: Note: Minor projections will need to comply with the NCC 7.1 – 10m 3m
requirements.
i. provide adequate solar access and natural
10.1m and above 3m
ventilation to the building and open spaces on
the site and adjoining properties; and
1Rounded to the nearest 0.1m
ii. address the potential for overlooking
and resultant loss of privacy on adjoining
properties.
Related elements
- 3.2 Building height
- 3.3 Street setbacks
- 3.9 Solar access for
adjoining sites
- 3.10 Visual privacy
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 93
thgieh
llaW
thgieh
llaW
pre-existing
retaining wall
thgieh
llaW
ground level at boundary
Where natural ground level at lot Where natural ground level at Where natural ground level at
boundary is level with natural ground lot boundary is lower than lot boundary is higher than
level at base of wall natural ground level at base of natural ground level at base
wall of wall
Figure 3.4a Measuring wall height for lot boundary setbacks Figure 3.4b Measuring wall height with Figure 3.4c Measuring wall
an existing retaining wall height to a gable
thgieh
llaW
thgieh
llaW thgieh
llaW
finished
floor
level
natural ground level natural ground level natural
ground
level
thgieh
llaW
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
finished
floor
level

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Built form and character
3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
(cont.)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
C3.4.2 The second storey of walls shall be set back in C3.4.3 Carports, patios, verandahs or equivalent
P3.4.4 Buildings are built up to lot boundaries where this: accordance with Table 3.4a for a maximum wall structures are permitted to be built up to the lot
length of 14m (including any balconies). For a portion boundary where the:
i. makes more effective use of space for primary
of wall exceeding 14m in length:
garden areas and/or private open space; i. structures are less than 10m in length;
ii. maintains adequate solar access to major i. the wall is to be set back 3m from the lot ii. structures do not exceed an equivalent wall
openings and private open space of adjoining boundary for the remainder of its length; or height of 3m (measured to the top of pillar and/
properties; and ii. contain a minimum 3m x 3m separation or post, refer Figure 3.4e);
iii. contributes positively to the prevailing or measured from the lot boundary (Refer Figure iii. structures do not exceed a ridge height of 4.2m;
future development context and streetscape 3.4d). and
as outlined in the local planning framework. Note: This applies only to two storey walls as three and iv. pillar and posts on the boundary are of a
four storey walls are already required to be set back 3m. horizontal dimension of 450mm by 450mm or
less.
Note: Carports, patios, verandahs or equivalent
structures will need to comply with the NCC
requirements, including but not limited to fire separation
and non-combustible materials.
Pillars or posts located on the boundary with a horizontal
dimension of 450mm or less are to be excluded from the
calculations of boundary wall length.
Boundary walls
C3.4.4 Boundary walls may be built in accordance with
Table 3.4b provided:
i. boundary walls are located behind the street
setback;
ii. overshadowing does not exceed the limits of
C3.9.1, C3.9.2 and C3.9.3; and
iii. they are finished to an equivalent standard to
the rest of the development, to the satisfaction
of the decision-maker.
C3.4.5 Where the boundary wall abuts an existing or
simultaneously constructed wall of similar or greater
dimension, that boundary wall may exceed the
requirements of C3.4.4 up to the extent of height
and length of the existing boundary wall.
Figure 3.4d Setbacks for two storey walls Figure 3.4e Measuring equivalent wall height for carports,
patios, verandahs or equivalent structures
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 94
equivalent
wall
height
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
1.5m min. 3m 1.5m
pillar and/or post
14m max min. 3m 14m max

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Built form and character
3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
(cont.)
W1 - boundary wall does DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
not exceed 2/3 lot
boundary A behind the Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
W1 street setback line
Table 3.4b Lot boundary setbacks
W2, W3 - boundary wall
W2
does not exceed 2/3 lot
Maximum
boundary B behind the Related
R-Coding boundary wall Maximum boundary wall length
street setback line figure
height
A B Maximum two-thirds the length of the lot boundary the wall abuts, Figure
R30 – R35 3.5m measured from behind the street setback line. Applicable up to two lot 3.4f
boundaries.
Maximum two-thirds the length of the lot boundary the wall abuts,
Figure
R40 and above 3.5m measured from behind the street setback line. Applicable to all lot
W3 3.4g
boundaries.
Street setback line Maximum 14m length, at which point the wall is to be set back a
Where frontage Figure
7m minimum of 3m measured from the lot boundary for a minimum length
is 8.5m or less 3.4h
of 3m. Applicable to all lot boundaries.
R50 and
Maximum 14m length, at which point the wall is to be set back a
Figure 3.4f Single storey boundary walls- two lot boundaries above
Where frontage minimum of 3m measured from the lot boundary for a minimum length Figure
is greater than 7m of 3m, with a cumulative maximum of two-thirds the length of the lot 3.4g and
B W1 - boundary wall does not 8.5m boundary the wall abuts measured from behind the street setback 3.4h
W2 exceed 2/3 lot boundary A line. Applicable to all lot boundaries.
behind the street setback line
R80 Code standards apply to single houses and grouped dwellings in areas coded R100, R160 and R-AC.
W1 W2 - boundary wall does not
exceed 2/3 lot boundary B Where the subject site is adjacent to a site with a lower density code, the maximum wall length and height of the boundary wall
W3 behind the street setback line between them is determined by the lower density code.
Where a boundary wall incorporates a retaining wall directly beneath the boundary wall, the retaining wall does not require
W3, W4 & W5 - boundary wall
does not exceed 2/3 lot assessment under clause C3.5.2 and is to be included in the wall height for the purpose of clause C3.4.4 (refer Figure 3.4i).
boundary C behind the street
setback line
A C
14m max min. 3m 14m max
W4
W5
Street setback line
Figure 3.4g Boundary walls – all lot boundaries Figure 3.4h Two storey boundary wall setbacks
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 95
m3
.nim
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Built form and character
3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
(cont.)
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
Grouped and multiple dwellings on the same lot
C3.4.6 For grouped dwellings on the same lot, the lot C3.4.7 For multiple dwellings, buildings on the same lot
boundary provisions of C3.4.1 to C3.4.5 are to or facing portions of the same building are to be
apply to internal site boundaries as if they were lot set back from each other as though there is a lot
boundaries (refer Figure 3.4j). boundary between them (refer Figure 3.4k).
Note: Visual privacy setbacks may also apply.
Building separation
6m
(3m) (3m)
proposed dwelling Dwellings set back from
internal site boundaries
according to C3.4.1 - C3.4.5
3m
(1.5m) (1.5m)
2m
natural ground
(1m) (1m)
level
Sources of overlooking are to apply visual
adjoining property
privacy according to C3.10.4
Figure 3.4i Total boundary wall height with retaining wall below Figure 3.4j Setbacks to internal lot boundaries Figure 3.4k Building separation for multiple dwellings
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 96
thgieh
llaw
yradnuob
latot
llaw
gniniater
yradnuob
tol
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Built form and character
3.5 Site works and retaining walls
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
C3.5.1 Retaining walls, fill and excavation forward of the Table 3.5a Setback of retaining walls and fill
P3.5.1 Development that considers and responds to the street setback line, not more than 0.5m above
natural features of the site and requires minimal or below the natural ground level, except where Height of retaining
excavation/fill. necessary to provide for pedestrian universal walls and fill 1 Setback required
access and/or vehicle access, drainage works, or As measured from natural ground level
P3.5.2 Where excavation/fill is necessary, all finished
natural light to a dwelling.
levels respect the natural ground level at the 1m or less 0m
lot boundary of the site and as viewed from the C3.5.2 Retaining walls and fill within the site and behind the
street. street setback to comply with Table 3.5a. 1.5m 1.5m
P3.5.3 Retaining walls that result in land which can be C3.5.3 Excavation within the site is permitted behind the
2m 2m
effectively used for the benefit of residents, do not street setback line and may be constructed up to
detrimentally affect the amenity of adjoining the lot boundary.
properties in the opinion of the decision-maker, 2.5m 2.5m
and are designed, engineered and landscaped Note: NCC and engineering requirements may apply.
having due regard to the provisions of element 3.10 3m + 3m
Visual privacy.
1 Take the nearest higher value for all height calculations.
Measurement of the height of site works or retaining walls for
the purpose of calculating Table 3.5a setback is to be taken
from the natural ground level at the lot boundary adjacent to
that point of the site works or retaining wall.
The relevant provisions of 3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites
and 3.10 Visual privacy apply.
Related elements
- 3.2 Building height
- 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
- 3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites
- 3.10 Visual privacy
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 97

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Built form and character
3.6 Streetscape
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
Addressing the street C3.6.4 Ground floor multiple dwellings fronting the street
P3.6.1 The design of dwelling façades, street walls and are provided with separate pedestrian access from
fences in the street setback area contributes C3.6.1 Single houses and grouped dwellings to address the street.
the street (including a communal street or right-
positively to streetscape, context and local
character. of-way where this is the primary frontage) in C3.6.5 A garage door and its supporting structures (or
accordance with the following: a garage wall where a garage is aligned parallel
P3.6.2 The building design addresses street frontages to the street) facing the primary street is not to
i. the primary entrance to each dwelling must be
and provides opportunity for passive surveillance occupy more than 50 per cent of the frontage at the
readily identifiable from the street; and
and social interaction. setback line as viewed from the street.
ii. provide at least one major opening on the
P3.6.3 Dwelling and building entries are: dwelling frontage with an outlook to the street. This may be increased up to 60 per cent where an
upper floor or balcony extends for more than half
i. accessible and protected from the weather; C3.6.2 For multiple dwellings, upper level balconies
the width of the garage and its supporting structures
and and/or windows overlook the street and public
(or a garage wall where a garage is aligned parallel to
ii. well-lit for safety and amenity, without domain areas. the street) and the entrance to the dwelling is clearly
opportunity for concealment, and designed to C3.6.3 For single houses and grouped dwellings, front visible from the primary street (refer Figure 3.6b).
enable passive surveillance of the entry from
doors to be protected from the weather (for
within the lot. C3.6.6 Carports and supporting structure shall not exceed
example by a porch, verandah, building over or
60 per cent of the frontage where projected forward
P3.6.4 Visual connectivity between the dwelling and similar), with a minimum dimension of 1.2m (refer
of the primary street setback line in accordance
the streetscape should be maintained and the Figure 3.6a).
with C3.3.5.
effect of the garage on the streetscape should
be minimised whereby the streetscape is not Note: Minimum dimension refers to the minimum length
dominated by garages. and width.
P3.6.5 The height of street walls and fences allows
for passive surveillance of the street from the
development whilst balancing the need for privacy
of private open space and the impact of traffic
noise, where located on a primary distributor,
district distributor or integrator arterial road.
6m 6m
cover to
dwelling entry 12m 10m
Related elements
Garage door and supporting structure may Garage door and supporting structure
- 2.3 Parking occupy up to 50% of the frontage width may occupy up to 60% where upper
floor or balcony extends more than
- 3.3 Street setbacks 1.2m minimum dimension half the width of the garage
- 3.7 Access
Figure 3.6a Covered primary dwelling entrance Figure 3.6b Maximum garage width calculation
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 98

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Built form and character
3.6 Streetscape
(cont.)
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
Street walls and fences C3.6.9 For sites on street corners, street fences or walls
within the secondary street setback area are to be
C3.6.7 When provided, fences or walls within the primary
designed in accordance with C3.6.7 and C3.6.8 for a
street setback area are to be:
minimum 50 per cent of the street boundary behind
i. a maximum height of 1.8m; and the primary street setback (refer Figure 3.6d).
ii. visually permeable above 1.2m (refer
Figure 3.6c);
measured from natural ground level on the primary
street side of the fence or wall.
C3.6.8 Solid pillars that form part of front fences or walls
are not more than 1.8m above natural ground level,
provided the horizontal dimension of the pillars is
not greater than 450mm by 450mm and pillars are
separated by visually permeable fencing in line with
C3.6.7 (Refer Figure 3.6c).
Figure 3.6d Corner lot fence requirements
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 99
%001
%05
muminim
Primary Street
teerts
yradnoceS
Street
setback line
visually
permeable
max. 1.2m
minimum 50% of secondary street fencing to be designed
in accordance with C3.6.9
Figure 3.6c Visually permeable fencing above 1.2m
m8.1
.xam
yradnuob
teerts
max.
0.45m
o n n a t d u e ra v l e g lo ro p u m n e d n l t e s v i e te l m8.1
.xam
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
area above 1.2m to be
visually permeable
max. 1.2m
verge

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Built form and character
3.7 Access
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
Vehicle access Driveways
P3.7.1 Access for each development site is to:
C3.7.1 Vehicle access to on site car parking spaces to C3.7.3 Driveways must be:
i. balance pedestrian and cyclist safety while
be provided via the lowest available street in the i. a minimum 3m wide;
providing safe vehicle access;
hierarchy, as follows:
ii. a maximum 6m wide at the street boundary;
ii. minimise the extent of impervious surfaces; i. where available, from a right-of-way or
iii. set back 0.3m from a side lot boundary or
iii. provide legible access; and communal street available for lawful use to
street pole;
iv. include high quality landscaping features. access the relevant site and which is trafficable
and drained from the property boundary to a iv. set back 6m to a street corner (refer Figure
P3.7.2 Vehicle access is designed and located to: constructed street; or 3.7b);
i. minimise the number and width of vehicle ii. from the secondary street or primary street v. aligned at right angles to the road carriageway;
access points and the impact on the where no right-of-way or communal street and
streetscape; exists. vi. adequately trafficable and drained.
ii. provide access to the street with the lowest C3.7.2 Vehicle access points are limited to one per lot C3.7.4 Driveways designed to allow vehicles to exit to the
volume of traffic; and (refer Figure 3.7a) except where: street in forward gear where the driveway:
iii. accommodate sloping sites and retaining walls. i. an existing dwelling is being retained that has i. serves five or more dwellings;
P3.7.3 The width of the communal street or battleaxe leg an established access point that is not able to ii. the distance from an on site car parking space
may be reduced where it is necessary to retain an serve the other dwellings;
to the street boundary is 30m or more; or
existing dwelling provided: ii. dwellings front the street and access is not
iii. the street to which it connects is a designated
available from a communal street or rear right-
i. safe vehicle access, setbacks or clearances primary distributor or integrator arterial.
of-way, whereby a maximum of one vehicle
and sightlines are achieved; and
access point is permitted per dwelling; or
ii. it is only reduced for the portion required to
iii. the lot frontage exceeds 40m, two vehicle
retain the dwelling.
access points are permitted.
Green title Battle-axe Grouped dwellings
TP= tangent point
6
m
TP
6
m
TP
TP TP
6m 6m
Related elements
   

- 1.2 Trees and landscaping
- 2.3 Parking
Figure 3.7a One vehicle access point per lot Figure 3.7b Driveways set back from street corner
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 100

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Built form and character
3.7 Access
(cont.)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
C3.7.5 Driveways designed to allow vehicles to pass in Sightlines
P3.7.4 Unobstructed sightlines provided at vehicle opposite directions where it serves five or more
access points to ensure safety and visibility along dwellings. Passing points are to be provided at least C3.7.7 Walls, fences and other structures truncated or
reduced to no higher than 0.75m within 1.5m of
vehicle access ways, streets, rights-of-way, every 30m with driveways to be minimum 5.5m wide
where walls, fences, or other structures adjoin:
communal streets, crossovers, and footpaths. for a minimum 6.3m length (excluding manoeuvring
tapers) (refer Figure 3.7c). i. a driveway that intersects a street, right-of-way
P3.7.5 Legible, safe, and direct access for residents
or communal street;
and their visitors to move between communal C3.7.6 For grouped and multiple dwellings located on a
car parking areas or public streets and individual designated primary distributor or integrator arterial ii. a right-of-way or communal street that
dwellings. road, driveways to allow for two vehicles to enter intersects a public street; and
and exit simultaneously in forward gear. Driveways iii. two streets that intersect (refer Figure 3.7e).
P3.7.6 Development with potential to be subdivided
must be minimum 5.5m wide for a minimum 6.3m
to create 20 or more green title lots, strata lots
length (excluding manoeuvring tapers) from the
or survey-strata lots provides legible internal
street boundary (refer Figure 3.7d).
connections and access to streets and be
designed to accommodate traffic movement and
volume, visitor parking, pedestrian access, street
shade trees, utility services and access for waste
collection and emergency service vehicles.
Driveway
Figure 3.7c Vehicle passing points
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 101
m5.5
.niM
Min. 6.3m
Min. 5.5m
Manouevring tapers excluded from minimum length and width dimension
Primary distributor or integrator arterial road
Figure 3.7d Vehicle passing point at lot access point
m3.6
muminiM
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Widened driveway to allow vehicles to
enter and exit simultaneously (C3.7.6)
Manouevring tapers removed for clarity
Driveway

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Built form and character
3.7 Access
(cont.)
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
Pedestrian access C3.7.9 For multiple dwellings and 10 or more grouped
dwellings that are served by a communal street, a
C3.7.8 For grouped and multiple dwellings, a legible, well-
pedestrian path is provided as follows:
defined, continuous path of travel is provided from
the public footpath and car parking areas to building i. minimum 1m wide, clear of any utilities or minor
access areas such as lift lobbies, stairs, accessways projections;
and individual dwelling entries. For mixed use ii. clearly delineated or separate from the
development, residential building access areas vehicular access; and
such as lift lobbies, stairs, accessways and individual
iii. continuous path of travel from the street
dwelling entries are separate from non-residential
boundary to ground floor dwelling or building
tenancy access.
entries.
C3.7.10 Where a pedestrian access leg is required to
provide access from a dwelling site to a public
street, it is to:
i. be a minimum width of 1.5m; and
ii. provide a continuous path of travel with a
minimum width of 1m, clear of any utilities or
minor projections.
The pedestrian access leg may be reduced to 1m
where required to retain an existing dwelling.
driveway truncation of fence
for sight lines
maintain 1.5m
sightlines 1m
refer section A
1m
Figure 3.7e Truncation locations or reduced fence height
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 102
A
1m lot
1.5m
truncation
1.5m 1.5m
0.75m fence
yradnuob
teerts
HOUSE
1.5m
maintain
sightlines
Section A
A
driveway truncation of fence
for sight lines
maintain 1.5m
sightlines 1m
refer section A
1m A
1m lot
1.5m
truncation
1.5m 1.5m
0.75m fence
yradnuob
teerts
HOUSE
1.5m
maintain
sightlines
Section A
A
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C

DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
Communal street and battleaxe legs
C3.7.11 A communal street or battleaxe leg is to be a C3.7.13 Notwithstanding C3.7.11, where a proposed
minimum width of 3.6m, inclusive of a minimum: development has the potential to be subdivided
to create 20 or more green title lots, strata lots or i. 3m wide driveway in accordance with C3.7.3;
survey-strata lots, with each lot obtaining driveway
and
access from a communal street, the communal
ii. 0.3m setback either side of the driveway street shall be a minimum 12m wide, which shall
(refer Figure 3.7f). include:
C3.7.12 A communal street or battleaxe leg, including
i. a paved vehicular carriageway with a minimum
any adjoining setbacks, is provided with adequate
width of 5.5m;
lighting and be landscaped in accordance with
C1.2.3. ii. a 1.2m wide universally accessible pedestrian
path;
0.3m 3m iii. soft landscaping of a minimum width 2.5m, with
driveway
small trees planted at a ratio of one tree per
dwelling; and
iv. lighting as required by the decision-maker.
Figure 3.7f Communal street width
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 103
yradnuob
tol
street setback to a 3.6m communal street
communal street (Table 3.3a)
yradnuob
etis
CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Built form and character
3.7 Access
(cont.)
0.3m

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Built form and character
3.8 Retaining existing dwellings
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
design principles (P)
C3.8.1 Where a dwelling is retained as part of a development:
P3.8.1 Retained dwellings, dwelling extension or
i. the appearance of the retained dwelling is upgraded externally to an equivalent maintenance standard of the new
redevelopment are to:
(or the rest of) the development; and
i. enhance the streetscape appearance of the
ii. the retained dwelling it is to comply with the following provisions of the R-Codes Part C:
existing dwelling(s) retained; or
1.1 Private open space - C1.1.1, C1.1.2
ii. complement established or future built form
1.2 Trees and landscaping - C1.2.1, C1.2.2, C1.2.3, and C1.2.4
in the locality as specified within the relevant
local planning framework. 1.4 Water management and conservation - C1.4.1 and C1.4.2
P3.8.2 Retained dwellings provide adequate outdoor and 2.3 Parking – C2.3.1 (minimums only) and C2.3.3
indoor amenity for residents. 2.4 Waste management – C2.4.1 and C2.4.3
2.5 Utilities – C2.5.1, C2.5.2 and C2.5.3
2.6 Outbuildings – C2.6.1 and C2.6.2
3.4 Lot boundary setbacks – C3.4.1, C3.4.3, C3.4.4, C3.4.5, C3.4.6 (applicable only to newly created lot or
site boundaries)
Related elements
- 1.1 Private open space
- 1.2 Trees and landscaping
- 1.4 Water management and conservation
- 2.3 Parking
- 2.4 Waste management
- 2.5 Utilities
- 2.6 Outbuildings
- 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 104

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Community
3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
design principles (P) requirements (C)
Midday 21 June
P3.9.1 Development is designed to protect solar access C3.9.1 In climate zones 4, 5, and 6, development is lot boundary
for neighbouring sites taking into account the designed that its shadow cast at midday, 21
potential to overshadow: June (refer Figure 3.9a) onto any other adjoining vertical
i. major openings to primary living spaces, in property and/or diagonally adjacent lot (refer sun angle
particular those oriented between north west, Figure 3.9b) does not exceed the limits set out in x
north and east; Table 3.9a.
X = length of shadow
ii. private open space and communal open Table 3.9a Maximum overshadowing
on adjoining lot
space; and
iii. roof mounted solar collectors. Maximum overshadowing
A
p
d
ro
jo
p
i
e
n
r
in
ty
g
Ad
(
j
p
o
e
in
rc
in
e
g
n t
p
a
r
g
o
e
p
o
e
f
r ty Diagona
l
l
o
ly
t s
adjacent
Building
R-Coding
dwelling site area)1 (percentage of dwelling
eaves overhang
site area)1 dimension X
Building
R25 and lower 25% 12.5% shadow cast
R30 – R40 35% 17.5%
N
Figure 3.9a Measuring extent of solar access
R50 or higher 50% 25% to neighbouring properties
For the purpose of calculating overshadowing, site area refers
to the area of the ground surface and is measured without A = Adjoining property.
Development
regard to any building on it, but taking into account its natural Site Refer Table 3.9a
maximum overshadowing
ground levels.
for adjoining property
Dividing fences up to 2m in height do not contribute to
B = Diagonally adjacent lot.
overshadowing calculations. A Refer Table 3.9a
A
maximum overshadowing
1Where proposed development adjoins a grouped dwelling for diagonally adjacent lot
development, the maximum overshadowing requirement is to
be applied for each grouped dwelling site area and excludes B
portions of common property (refer Figure 3.9.c)
Related elements
- 3.1 Site cover N
- 3.2 Building height
- 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks Figure 3.9b Overshadowing for adjoining property
and diagonally adjacent lots
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 105

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Community
3.9 Solar access for adjoining sites
(cont.)
30m
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
front half of lot
Lot A Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
requirements (C)
building building
C3.9.2 Notwithstanding C3.9.1, in climate zones 4, 5, and
6, where the adjoining property is:
shadow shadow
i. coded R40 or greater; and
ii. has a lot frontage 7.5m or less (excluding
battleaxe lots);
Site B Site C Site D
development is designed so that its shadow cast at
midday, 21 June onto any other adjoining property
common property does not exceed the limits set out in Table 3.9b.
C3.9.3 Where an adjoining property shares a northern
lot boundary with more than one lot including the N
Lot A can cast shadow over a maximum 35% of Site B site area
development site, the limit of shading at C3.9.1
Lot A can cast shadow over a maximum 35% of Site C site area
shall be cumulative and proportional to the length Figure 3.9d Proportionate limits from shared southern
Lot A can cast shadow over a maximum 35% of Site D site area
N of the shared boundary/ies of the development site boundary for narrow lots
(refer Figure 3.9e).
Figure 3.9c Proportionate limits from shared southern
boundary for grouped dwellings Note: C3.9.3 does not apply to diagonally adjacent lots.
Table 3.9b Maximum overshadowing for narrow lots
Maximum overshadowing
Adjoining
property Overshadowing Overshadowing of
R-Coding of the the rear half of the
front half of the site site
R40 35%
No maximum
overshadowing
R50 - R60 50%
Refer to Figure 3.9d for calculation of overshadowing of narrow
lots.
Figure 3.9e Proportionate and cumulative limits for shared
southern boundary
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 106
teerts
yramirp
rear half of lot
Lot A
Lot B
overshadowing calculated on rear half of site
Lot A maximum overshadowing 50% of the
rear half of Lot B
30m 10m 10m
Lot A Lot B Lot C
building
shadow
Maximum 25% of site area to
be overshadowed
Lot D(R20)
50m
Lot A can cast shadow over a maximum 15% of Lot D site area
Lot B can cast shadow over a maximum 5% of Lot D site area
Lot C can cast shadow over a maximum 5% of Lot D site area N
gnidliub gnidliub
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
shadow

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Community
3.10 Visual privacy
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply
design principles (P) requirements (C)
P3.10.1 Direct overlooking of major openings and active For development adjoining an existing dwelling
habitable spaces of adjacent dwellings and 1.6m from
C3.10.1 All sources of overlooking are oriented, offset or
adjoining properties minimised through: floor level
setback in accordance with Table 3.10a so that
i. building siting, layout and design; the cone of vision (refer Figure 3.10a) does not
ii. design and location of major openings; capture major openings and/or active habitable
iii. landscape screening of outdoor active spaces on an adjoining property (refer Figure
habitable spaces; and/or 3.10b). 450
iv. design and location of screening devices. Table 3.10a Cone of vision radius
P3.10.2 A
a
a
p
d
d
p
j
e
o
r
q
i
o
n
u
p
i
a
n
r
t
i
g
a
e
t
p
v
e
r
i s
o
in
u
p
t
a
e
e
l
r
r
p
f
t
a
r
i
i
e
c
v
e
s
a
s
c
in
y
b
c
e
a
lu
c
tw
d
h
i
i
e
n
e
e
g
v
n
e
m
d
d
e
w
t
a
h
s
e
r
u
o
ll
r
u
i
e
n
g
s
g
h
s
s
u
a
c
n
h
d
a s:
T
h
(w
y
a
i
p
b
th
i
e
t
a
a
o
b
f
f l
l
h
o
e
a
o
s
b
r
p
i
l
t
a
e
a
c
v
b
e
e
l
l
e
o
r
f
o
m
o
o
m
re
/ a
th
c
a
ti
n
v e Cone of vision ra
A
d
r
i
e
u
a
s
s
Lot
boundary
i. offsetting the location of ground and first floor Areas coded coded
0.5m above natural ground
windows so that viewing is oblique rather than R50 or lower higher
direct; level) than R50 cone of vision radius
ii. building boundary walls where appropriate; Major opening from bedroom Figure 3.10a Establishing a cone of vision beyond lot
4.5m 3m
and study boundary
iii. setting back the upper storeys from the lot
boundary; Major opening from habitable
room other than bedroom and 6m 4.5m adjoining property
iv. providing higher or lower windows, or windows
study
with obscure glazing; and/or major
Outdoor active habitable opening
v. screening (including landscaping, fencing, 7.5m 6m
space
timber screens, external blinds, window hoods
and shutters).
property
P3.10.3 Visual privacy strategies maintain amenity of boundary
habitable rooms and active habitable space with
regard to solar access, natural ventilation and
external outlook both within the development and
for adjoining properties. 45o 45o
major opening
development site
cone of vision radius in accordance
Related elements
with Table 3.10a
- 2.2 Solar access and natural ventilation
- 3.4 Lot boundary setbacks Figure 3.10b Cone of vision does not capture major
openings on adjoining property
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 107

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Community
3.10 Visual privacy
(cont.)
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
C3.10.2 Notwithstanding C3.10.1, where the cone of vision C3.10.4 Sources of overlooking for grouped or multiple
captures a major opening or an active habitable dwellings on the same lot are to apply C3.10.1,
space of an existing dwelling behind the street C3.10.2 and C3.10.3.
setback on an adjoining property, the source of
overlooking is designed to limit or interrupt the line
of sight into the major opening or active habitable For development adjoining a vacant or unknown site
space of the adjoining property through one or C3.10.5 Where an adjoining property is vacant residential
more of the following: zoned land, or when the location of a major
i. incorporate a permanent, fixed vertical or opening or an active habitable space is unknown,
horizontal building element such as a planter all sources of overlooking are oriented, offset or
box, fin or window hood (refer Figure 3.10c, set back in accordance with Table 3.10a so that
Figure 3.10d); the cone of vision does not extend beyond the lot
boundaries (refer Figure 3.10h).
ii. have permanent, obscure glazing in any part of
the window below 1.6m above floor level (refer C3.10.6 Notwithstanding C3.10.5 where the cone of vision
Figure 3.10e); or extends beyond a lot boundary behind the street
iii. have permanent screening that is a minimum 75 setback on an adjoining property, the source of
per cent obscure to any part of the window or overlooking is designed to restrict the view in the
active habitable space below 1.6m above floor direction of the adjoining property through one or
adjoining property level (refer Figure 3.10f). more of the following:
Note: Cone of vision radius includes the width of any i. incorporate a permanent, fixed vertical or
major opening adjoining right-of-way, communal street or battleaxe horizontal building element such as a fin or
leg or the like. window hood (refer Figure 3.10i);
ii. have permanent, obscure glazing in any part of
mited
line
of
sight
cone of vision
b
p
o
r
u
o
n
p
d
e
a
rt
ry
y
C3.10.3
b
1
p
N
.5
e
r
o
o
m
d
t
p
w
r o
f
e
i
r
t
o
o
r
h
t
m
m
s
y
t
,
o
a
a
m
n
r
p
e
d
s
a
a
t
in
r
u
s
a
g
d
u
l l
r
y
C
e
e
l
m
3
d
m
.
a
1
f
0
r
a
y
o
j
.
o
b
2
m
r
,
e
a
o
t
o
h
p
m
f
e
e
f
a
s
e
n
j
e
o
i
d
n
t
r
g
g
a
o
e
o
m
p
o
n
e
i
f
n
a
n
o
i
n
m
i
n
n
a
e
u
g
d
m
m
t
j
o
o
a
o
i
a
j
n
f
o
i
r
n g
iii. h
t
F
h
i
a
g
e
v
u
e
w
r e
p
in
e
3
d
r
.1
m
o
0
w
a
e
n
)
b
;
e
o
e
n
l
r
t
o
s
w
c r
1
e
.6
e
m
ni n
ab
g
o
th
v
a
e
t
f
i
l
s
o
a
o r
m
le
in
v
i
e
m
l
u
(r
m
ef e
75
r
li before limiting opening to another (refer Figure 3.10g). per cent obscure to any part of the window or
line of sight active habitable below 1.6m above floor level
45o Note: Offsetting a major opening provides an oblique
(refer Figure 3.10f).
view between facing major openings, however may not
0.5m
major opening satisfy potential overlooking on other floor levels of the
adjoining property (such as an active habitable space
development site or a major opening on a lower floor level).
cone of vision radius in accordance
with Table 3.10a
Figure 3.10c Vertical visual privacy design solutions to limit
line of sight to adjoining property
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 108

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
Community
3.10 Visual privacy
(cont.)
Figure 3.10d Horizontal and vertical visual privacy design solutions to limit line of sight
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 109
ytreporp yradnuob
limited
line
of
sight
major opening
development site adjoining property
cone of vision radius in accordance
with Table 3.10a
m6.1
0.5m
Where top of window is more than 1.6m above floor level
line of sight measured from 1.6m above floor level
ytreporp yradnuob
0.5m
lliimmiitteedd
lliinnee
ooff
ssiigghhtt
major opening
development site adjoining property
cone of vision radius in accordance
with Table 3.10a
m1.1
adjoining property active habitable space
Where top of window is less than 1.6m above floor level
line of sight measured from 1.1m above floor level
ytreporp yradnuob
1m0.3
limited
line of sight
development site
cone of vision radius in accordance
with Table 3.10a
m6.1
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
1 Vertical extent of active habitable space for the purpose
of measuring line of sight

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Community
3.10 Visual privacy
(cont.) limited line
of sight
Privacy screen minimum
1.6m above floor level
Privacy screen blocks view
perpendicular to boundary
limited line
of sight
Privacy screen minimum limited line
obscure glazing minimum 1.6m 1.6m above floor level of sight
above floor level
Figure 3.10e Obscure glazing for visual privacy Figure 3.10f Permanently fixed screening for visual privacy
Privacy screen blocks view
perpendicular to boundary
limited line
of sight
adjoining property property
parallel boundary
major 1.6m from
1.5m
m
opening floor level c
b
o
e
n
fo
e
r e
o f
l i
v
m
is
it
io
in
n
g
in line of sight
b o e r d s ro tu o d m y 450
45o
adjoining
property
45o
development
site
c
o
o
p
n
e
e
n i
o
n
f
g
v
s
i
o
si
n
o
a
n
l t
a
e
p
r
p
n
l
a
ie
te
s
l
t
e
o
v
m
el
a
s
jor
Lot
boundary
cone of vision radius in accordance
with Table 3.10a
cone of vision radius
Figure 3.10g Offsetting major openings Figure 3.10h Establishing cone of vision to lot boundary Figure 3.10i Limiting line of sight to adjoining property
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 110

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 The Garden | 2.0 The Building | 3.0 Neighbourliness | Table C
Table C Primary controls
This table provides a summary of deemed-to-comply R80
primary controls for all development in Part C.
R100-SL2
R30 R35 R40 R50 R60 (for multiple dwellings
Refer to each element for application and further information. refer R-Codes Vol. 2.)
Soft landscaping (% of site area)
15% 10%
1.2 Trees and landscaping
Maximum site cover (% of site area)
60% 65% 70% 85%
3.1 Site cover
Maximum storeys 2 2 2 3 3 4 4
Maximum building
height
3.2 Building Max wall/roof height – skillion 8m 8m 8m 11m 11m 14m 14m
height
Max wall height – pitched/hipped 7m 7m 7m 10m 10m 13m 13m
Max roof height – pitched/hipped 10m 10m 10m 13m 13m 16m 16m
Primary street 4m 4m 3m 2m 2m 2m 1m
Minimum street
Secondary street 1.5m 1.5m 1m 1m 1m 1m 1m
setback
3.3 Street Communal Street 0.5m NA
setbacks
Adjoining laneway or right-of-way where
it is the primary street to the dwelling 2m NA
Adjoining laneway or right-of-way 0.5m 0.5m/nil
Up to 3.5m (1st storey) 1m 1m
Minimum lot
boundary 3.6m -7m (2nd storey) 1.5m 1.5m
setbacks 1
3.4 Lot boundary 7.1m -10m (3rd storey) 3m 3m
setbacks
10.1m and above (4th storey) 3m 3m
Maximum boundary wall height 3.5m 7m 13m
3.4 Lot boundary setbacks (1 storey) (2 storey) (4 storey)
Notes:
Primary controls of Table C apply, except where modified by the local planning framework, in which case development complies with the controls set out in the applicable local planning instrument.
R80 Code standards apply to single houses, grouped dwellings in areas coded R100, R160 and R-AC.
1 Boundary walls permitted in accordance with C3.4.4 - C3.4.5.
2 Subject to C2.10.1.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 111

PART D
Land
1.0 LAND 113
TABLE D 118
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 112

1.0 LAND
OBJECTIVES
1A To provide for a consistent and
coordinated approach to residential
built form and development.
1B To ensure that residential
development meets community
expectations in regard to appearance,
use and density.
1C To promote a range of lot sizes to
support housing diversity and a variety
of built form typologies.
1.1 Site area
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 113

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Land | Table D
1.1 Site area
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply 3m
design principles (P) requirements (C)
Minimum and average site area
P1.1.1 Development of the type and density indicated by 3m
the density code designated in the scheme. C1.1.1 Development which complies with the dwelling
type and site area requirements set out in Table D R30 255.5m2 10m
P1.1.2 The WAPC, in consultation with the local and the following provisions. +4.5m2
government, may approve the creation of a green 7m 260m2 (min 260m2)
title lot, survey-strata lot or strata lot of a lesser Calculation of minimum site area
minimum and/or average site area than that
C1.1.2 The minimum site area set out in Table D is
specified in Table D provided that the proposed
calculated as follows: 26m
variation would be no more than five per cent less in
area than that specified in Table D and will: i. in the case of a single house, the area of a
i. facilitate the protection of an environmental or green title lot or survey-strata lot; or Truncation area may be included refer C1.1.3i
heritage feature; ii. in the case of a grouped dwelling, the area of
ii. facilitate the retention of a significant element land occupied by the dwelling itself, together Figure 1.1a Site area truncations
that contributes toward an existing streetscape with all other areas whether contiguous or
worthy of retention; not, designated for the exclusive use of the
occupants of that dwelling.
iii. facilitate the development of lots with separate
and sufficient frontage to more than one public
street;
iv. overcome a special or unusual limitation on the
development of the land imposed by its size,
shape or other feature;
v. allow land to be developed with housing of
the same type and form as land in the vicinity
and which would not otherwise be able to be
developed; or
vi. achieve specific objectives of the local
planning framework.
Related elements
PART B: PART C:
5.5.2 Aged and dependent person’s dwellings 2.7 Universal design
5.5.3 Single bedroom dwellings 2.9 Small dwellings
5.5.4 Accessible dwellings 2.10 Housing on lots less than 100m2
5.5.5 Small dwellings
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 114

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Land | Table D
1.1 Site area
(cont.)
R25 site area requirements
DESIGN PRINCIPLES DEEMED-TO-COMPLY (min 300m2 avg 350m2, battleaxe 425m2)
Development demonstrates compliance with the following Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply 40m2 included in minimum site area
design principles (P) requirements (C) refer C1.1.3(iii)
C1.1.3 The following adjustments shall apply for the 20m 16m
P1.1.3 The WAPC, in consultation with the local
purposes of assessing compliance of a proposed
government, may approve the creation of a
development with the minimum and average site
survey-strata lot or strata lot for an existing
areas of Table D:
authorised grouped dwelling or multiple dwelling
development of a lesser minimum and average site i. in the case of a lot with a corner truncation to a 16m 315.5m2 320m2
20m
area than that specified in Table D, where, in the public street, up to a maximum of 20m2 of that
3m
opinion of the WAPC or the local government, the truncation shall be added to the area of the
3m
development on the resulting survey-strata or strata adjoining lot, survey-strata lot or strata lot as 4m
lots is consistent with the objectives of the relevant the case may be (refer Figure 1.1a);
design elements of the R-Codes, and the orderly ii. in areas coded R40 and below; in the case of 2m max.
Battleaxe access leg up Battleaxe lot site area
and proper planning of the locality. a rear battleaxe site, the site area is inclusive to maximum 20% site
of the access leg provided that the area of the area required in Table D
access leg contributes no more than 20 per
cent of the site area as required by Table D Figure 1.1b Calculating minimum and average site area for
(refer Figure 1.1b); areas coded R40 and below
iii. where the battleaxe lot (excluding the access
leg) adjoins or abuts a right-of-way or reserve R50 site area requirements
for open space, pedestrian access, school site (min 160m2 avg 180m2, battleaxe 160m2)
or equivalent, half the width of the right-of-way
30m2 included in minimum site area
or reserve (up to a maximum depth of 2m) may
refer C1.1.3(iii)
be added to the site area (refer Figure 1.1b and
1.1c); or 19m 11m
iv. in areas coded R50 and above; in the case of
a battleaxe lot, the vehicle and/or pedestrian 11m 204.5m2 165m2
access leg and associated truncations shall 15m
be excluded from the calculation of minimum 3m
site area to achieve an effective lot area 4m 3m
consistent with the minimum site area required
in Table D (refer Figure 1.1c).
2m max.
Access leg is excluded from Effective lot area to achieve
effective lot area calculations minimum site area requirement
(C1.1.3iv) of Table D (C1.1.3iv)
Figure 1.1c Effective lot area for areas coded R50 and above
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 115

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Land | Table D
1.1 Site area
(cont.)
DEEMED-TO-COMPLY
Development satisfies the following deemed-to-comply requirements (C)
Site area variations
Site area variations are subject to C1.1.3
C1.1.4 The following variations to the minimum and average C1.1.7 In areas coded R50 and above; for an accessible
site area set out in Table D may be made: dwelling designed to gold level universal design (in
accordance with Part C, C2.7.2), or a small dwelling
i. in the case of a single house, grouped dwelling
(in accordance with Part C, C2.9.1) that is the subject
or multiple dwelling; the area of a lot, survey-
of a development proposal, the minimum and
strata lot or strata lot approved by the WAPC;
average site area of Table D may be reduced by up
or
to 35 per cent, provided that:
ii. the area of any existing lot, survey-strata lot
or strata lot with permanent legal access to a i. for single houses and grouped dwellings, no
public road, notwithstanding that it is less than site is less than 100m2; and
that required in Table D. ii. the site area reduction is limited for small
C1.1.5 In areas coded R25 and below; for an aged or dwellings to a maximum 50 per cent of the total
dependent persons’ dwelling (in accordance number of dwellings or sites.
with Part B, 5.5.2 C2.1-C2.4) or a single bedroom C1.1.8 For multiple dwellings in areas coded R30 to R60;
dwelling (in accordance with Part B, 5.5.3 C3) that where a significant existing tree is retained on a
is the subject of a proposed development, the site that is subject to a development proposal, the
minimum and average site area of Table D may be average site area of Table D may be reduced by 10
reduced by up to one third. per cent. This reduction is limited to dwellings not
already subject to a reduced average site area under
C1.1.6 In areas coded R30 to R40; for an accessible
C1.1.6 or C1.1.7.
dwelling designed to gold level universal design (in
accordance with Part B, 5.5.4 C4 or Part C, C2.7.2),
or a small dwelling (in accordance with Part B,
5.5.5 C5 or Part C, C2.9.1) that is the subject of a
development proposal, the minimum and average
site area of Table D may be reduced by up to 35 per
cent, provided that:
i. for single houses and grouped dwellings, no
site is less than 100m2; and
ii. for development or subdivision of 4 or more
dwellings or sites, the site area reduction is
limited to a maximum 50 per cent of the total
number of dwellings or sites.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 116

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Land | Table D
Table D Site area requirements
R-Code Dwelling type Site area per dwelling (m2) Minimum lot area/rear battleaxe (m2) ▼ Minimum frontage (m) ▼ Notes
Single house or R80 site area requirements apply to all
R2 Min 5000 - 50
grouped dwelling single house(s) or grouped dwellings
Single house or located on lots coded R100, R160 and
R2.5 Min 4000 - 40
grouped dwelling R-AC
Single house or
R5
grouped dwelling
Min 2000 - 30 ▼only applies to single houses.
Single house or Min 875 - Indicated not applicable.
925 20
R10 grouped dwelling Av 1000 Min. Minimum site area
Multiple dwelling Av 1000 - -
Av. Average site area
Single house or Min 700
762.5 17
R12.5 grouped dwelling Av 800
Multiple dwelling Av 800 - -
Single house or Min 580
655 12
PART B R15 grouped dwelling Av 666
Multiple dwelling Av 666 - -
Single house or Min 500
587.5 12
R17.5 grouped dwelling Av 571
Multiple dwelling Av 571 - -
Single house or Min 350
450 10
R20 grouped dwelling Av 450
Multiple dwelling Av 450 - -
Single house or Min 300
425 8
R25 grouped dwelling Av 350
Multiple dwelling Av 350 - -
Min 260
R30 Single house 410 -
Av 300
Min 220
R35 Single house 395 -
Av 260
Min 180
R40 Single house 380 -
Av 220
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 117

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
1.0 Land | Table D
Table D Site area requirements
(cont.)
R-Code Dwelling type Site area per dwelling (m2) Minimum lot area/rear battleaxe (m2) ▼ Minimum frontage (m) ▼ Notes
Min 260 R80 site area requirements apply to all
Grouped dwelling - -
R30 Av 300 single house(s) or grouped dwellings
Multiple dwelling Av 300 - - located on lots coded R100, R160 and
Min 220 R-AC
Grouped dwelling - -
R35 Av 260 ▼only applies to single houses.
Multiple dwelling Ave 260 - -
- Indicated not applicable.
Min 180
Grouped dwelling - - Min. Minimum site area
R40 Ave 220
Av. Average site area
PART C Multiple dwelling Ave 115 - -
Single house or Min 160
160 -
R50 grouped dwelling Ave 180
Multiple dwelling Ave 100 - -
Single house or Min 120
120 -
R60 grouped dwelling Ave 150
Multiple dwelling Ave 85 - -
Single house or Min 100
100 -
R80 grouped dwelling Ave 120
Multiple dwelling Refer R-Codes Vol. 2 - -
Single house or Min 80
R100-SL - -
grouped dwelling No av applies
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 118

APPENDICES
A1 DEFINITIONS 121
A2 CONTEXT AND SITE ANALYSIS 127
A3 APPLICATION DOCUMENTATION 128
A4 UNIVERSAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 131
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 119

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A1 Definitions
ACCESSIBLE HOUSING / DWELLINGS - dwellings having BALCONY - a balustraded platform on the outside of a COMMUNAL STREET – common property or private
features already in place to enable use by people with a dwelling with access from an upper internal room. street providing joint access to two or more dwellings in
disability. a residential development and may include vehicle and
BASEMENT – a building floor level in which 50 per cent or
pedestrian access, and landscaping.
ACTIVE HABITABLE SPACE - any: more of its volume is below natural ground level.
CONE OF VISION – the limits of outlook from any given
- habitable room with a internal floor area greater than BATTLEAXE LOT - a single house lot that has a frontage
viewpoint for the purposes of assessing the extent of
10m2; and for purposes of servicing and access to a public road only
overlooking from that point, measured by applying a viewing
- balcony, courtyard, patio, verandah or other forms of through a strip of connecting land containing a pedestrian cut off angle not less than 45 degrees horizontally and
private open space. access leg and/ or vehicular access way that is part of the extending 90 degrees down to the ground.
lot. The term excludes a site that has vehicle access from a
ACTIVITY CENTRE - as defined under the Planning and private or communal street or right-of-way connected to a CONTINUOUS PATH OF TRAVEL - an uninterrupted route
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. public road. to or within premises or buildings and providing access to all
services and facilities (AS1428.1). It should not incorporate any
ADAPTABLE HOUSING / DWELLINGS – dwellings designed BOUNDARY WALL - a wall, on or less than 600mm from any
step, stairway, turnstile, revolving door, escalator, hazard or
and built to accommodate future changes to suit occupants lot boundary (green title or survey-strata lot), other than a
other impediment which would prevent it from being safely
with mobility impairment or life cycle needs. street boundary.
negotiated by people with disability.
ADJOINING PROPERTY - any lot: BUILDING - any structure whether fixed or moveable,
COURTYARD - open space at ground level or on a structure
- on which any dwelling for which provision is made in the temporary or permanent, placed or erected on land, and that is open to the sky and and bound by the building on
R-Codes may be constructed under the scheme; and the term includes dwellings and structures appurtenant three or more sides.
to dwellings such as carports, garages, verandahs, patios,
- which shares a boundary or portion of a boundary
outbuildings and retaining walls, but excludes boundary CROSSOVER – the vehicle access point (or driveway) running
with a lot on which there is a proposed residential
fences, pergolas and swimming pools. from the property boundary to the edge of the road.
development site or is separated from that lot by a
right-of-way, vehicle access way, pedestrian access way, BUILDING WIDTH – the width of the building as viewed DAYLIGHT - consists of both skylight (diffuse light from
access leg of a battleaxe lot or the equivalent not more from the primary street. the sky) and sunlight (direct beam radiation from the sun).
than 6m in width. Daylight changes with the time of day, season and weather
CARPORT - An unenclosed structure designed to
conditions.
AGED PERSON - a person who is aged 55 years or over. accommodate one or more motor vehicles and being without
a door. DECISION-MAKER - that body, organisation or authorised
AHD - Australian Height Datum, the official national vertical
person legally vested with the power to make decisions,
datum for Australia. CLIMATE ZONE - as defined by the NCC. Western Australia
pursuant to relevant legislation, in respect of residential
is divided into five climate zones based on humidity and
AMENITY - as defined under the Planning and Development development in accordance with the R-Codes.
temperature, ranging from temperate in the southwest to hot/
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 and includes
arid in the interior to hot/humid in the north. Refer Climate DEEMED-TO-COMPLY - a proposal, or a component of
the ‘liveability’, comfort or quality of a place which makes
Zones Map. a proposal, that complies with the deemed-to-comply
it pleasant and agreeable to be in for individuals and the
provisions of the R-Codes, or an adopted local planning
community. Amenity is important in the public, communal COMMON PROPERTY – has the meaning given by section 10
policy.
and private domains and includes the enjoyment of sunlight, of the Strata Titles Act 1985.
outlook, privacy and quiet. It also includes protection from DEEP SOIL AREA - soft landscape area on lot with no
pollution and odours. COMMUNAL OPEN SPACE - outdoor areas within the lot impeding building structure or feature above or below, which
and either at ground level or on structure that is accessible
supports growth of small to large canopy trees and meets a
ANCILLARY DWELLING - self-contained dwelling on the to and shared by occupants of the dwellings for communal
stated minimum dimension. Used primarily for landscaping
same site as a dwelling which may be attached to, integrated recreational use. It does not include driveways or car parking
and open to the sky, deep soil areas exclude basement
with or detached from the dwelling. areas.
car parks, services, swimming pools, tennis courts and
AT-GRADE - located at same height as ground level. impervious surfaces including car parks, driveways and roof
areas.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 120

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A1 Definitions
(cont.)
DEPENDANT PERSON - a person with a recognised form of FAÇADE - the external face of a building, generally the level and measured to the highest point of a wall or roof
disability requiring special accommodation for independent principal face, facing a public street or space. of a building vertically above that point excluding minor
living or special care. projections.
FREEHOLD SCHEME - has the meaning given by section 8(2)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES - specific design objectives for each of the Strata Titles Act 1985. HEIGHT, WALL - this is the vertical distance between the
element of R-Codes Volume 1 are to be met by all residential point where the base of the wall meets the natural ground
FRONTAGE - the width of a lot at the primary street setback
development subject to Volume 1 and are to be used in level at the boundary immediately adjacent to the wall and
line, provided that in the case of battleaxe or other irregularly
the preparation, submission and assessment for proposals measured to the top of the wall or parapet.
shaped lots, it shall be as determined by the decision-maker.
for the purpose of determining their compliance with
HERITAGE AREA - as defined under the Planning and
R-Codes Volume 1. A proposal is required to demonstrate FUNCTIONAL UTILITIES - functional utilities associated
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015.
compliance with design principles where it does not satisfy with the dwelling to achieve efficient, comfortable and
corresponding deemed-to-comply provisions. environmentally sustainable operating outcomes including, HERITAGE-PROTECTED PLACE - as defined under the
but not limited to air-conditioning, plant, clothes drying, hot Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
DEVELOPMENT - as defined under the Planning and
water systems, antennas and satellite dishes, solar collectors, Regulations 2015.
Development Act 2005.
inverters and batteries, electric vehicle charging and rainwater
HIGH-FREQUENCY ROUTE – a public transport route that
DEVELOPMENT SITE - as defined under the Planning and tanks.
runs a service at least every 15 minutes during weekday peak
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015.
GARAGE - any roofed structure, other than a carport, periods (7am to 9am and 5pm to 7pm).
DRIVEWAY - the portion of the paved vehicle access way designed to accommodate one or more motor vehicles.
IMPERVIOUS AREA/SURFACE/ MATERIAL – surfaces that
between a car parking area and the property boundary,
GREEN TITLE LOT - a lot owned in fee simple issued with a do not permit the penetration of rainwater into the ground
excluding any associated landscaping or pedestrian path on
certificate of title under the Transfer of Land Act 1893, other and instead generates stormwater run-off, typically to
either side.
than a strata lot or a survey-strata lot. drainage systems.
DUAL KEY DWELLING – a form of ancillary dwelling with
GROUPED DWELLING - a dwelling that is one of a group of INCIDENTAL DEVELOPMENT - development which is
a common internal corridor and lockable doors to sections
two or more dwellings on the same lot such that no dwelling associated with or attached to a dwelling and incidental to its
within the dwelling so that it is able to be separated into two
is placed wholly or partly vertically above or below another, main residential functions.
independent units.
except where special conditions of landscape or topography
INTERNAL FLOOR AREA - in relation to a room or dwelling,
DWELLING - a building or portion of a building being used, dictate otherwise, and includes a dwelling in a strata titles
the internal area measured within the finished surfaces of
adapted, or designed or intended to be used for the purpose scheme with common property.
the walls, and includes the area occupied by any cupboard
of human habitation on a permanent basis by a single person,
HABITABLE ROOM/SPACE - as defined by the NCC for a or other built-in furniture, fixture or fitting but excludes any
a single family, or no more than six persons who do not
room/space used for normal domestic activities that includes: garages.
comprise a single family.
- a bedroom, living room, lounge room, music room, sitting INTERNAL WALLS - those walls which are wholly included
DWELLING ALIGNMENT - means the vertical external room, television room, kitchen, scullery, dining room, within the dwelling including walls that abut covered
face of any building comprising solid building material, but sewing room, study, playroom, family room, sunroom, outdoor living areas but does not include walls which are
excludes any projections such as balconies, eaves, porches gymnasium, fully enclosed swimming pool or patio; common to two dwellings in grouped or multiple dwelling
and verandahs.
but excludes: developments.
EFFECTIVE LOT AREA - that part of the lot that is capable of - a bathroom, laundry, water closet, pantry, walk-in LANDSCAPE / LANDSCAPING / LANDSCAPED - land
development and excludes any vehicle or pedestrian access wardrobe, corridor, hallway, lobby, photographic developed with garden beds, shrubs and trees, or by the
legs and associated truncations. darkroom, clothes drying room, verandah and planting of lawns, and includes such features as rockeries,
ENCLOSED - an area bound on three or more sides by a unenclosed swimming pool or patio and other spaces of ornamental ponds, swimming pools, barbecue areas or
permanent wall and covered in an impervious material. a specialised nature occupied neither frequently nor for playgrounds and any other such area approved of by the
extended periods. decision-maker as landscaped area.
EXTERNAL FIXTURES - refer utilities.
HEIGHT, BUILDING - this is the distance between the
point where the base of the wall meets the natural ground
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 121

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A1 Definitions
(cont.)
LANEWAY - a narrow local street type without a verge LOT BOUNDARY - the boundary between a lot and any other MULTIPLE DWELLING – a dwelling in a group of more than
located along the rear and/or side property boundary, parcel of land, excluding a street boundary. one dwelling on a lot where any part of the plot ratio area of
typically used in more dense residential areas when smaller a dwelling is vertically above any part of the plot ratio area of
LOT IN A STRATA SCHEME - has the meaning given by
lot layouts justify rear garaging, and where alternative vehicle any other but:
section 3 of the Strata Titles Act 1985.
access is needed for lots fronting busy streets or parks. - does not include a grouped dwelling; and
LOT IN A SURVEY-STRATA SCHEME - has the meaning
LEASEHOLD SCHEME - has the meaning given by section - includes any dwellings above the ground floor in a mixed
given by section 3 of the Strata Titles Act 1985.
8(3) of the Strata Titles Act 1985. use development.
MAJOR OPENING - a window, door or other opening in
LIGHTWELL - an opening to the sky, bound on four sides by the exterior wall of a habitable room that provides external NATURAL GROUND LEVEL - the levels on a site which
building volume, with a height to width ratio of more than 2:1. means of light or view for that room or space, but does not precede the proposed development, excluding any site
LOCAL CHARACTER / LOCAL IDENTITY - the natural, include an opening or openings that: works unless approved by the decision-maker or established
cultural and historic characteristics of an area that are intrinsic as part of subdivision of the land preceding development.
- in aggregate do not exceed 1m2 in any such wall,
to the locality, and which the local community relate to or as (provided that adjoining or contiguous windows at the NATURAL VENTILATION - the movement of a sufficient
defined in the local planning framework. See also sense of junction of two walls forming an internal angle of 90 volume of fresh air through a dwelling to refresh indoor air.
place.
degrees or less shall be aggregated); or NCC - National Construction Code, comprising the Building
LOCAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - as defined under the - are glazed in an obscure material and are not able to be Code of Australia (BCA) and Plumbing Code of Australia
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) opened; or (PCA).
Regulations 2015.
- have a sill height not less than 1.6m above floor level. NON-HABITABLE ROOM/SPACE – any room or space that is
LOCAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK - comprises all not defined as a habitable room or space in the NCC.
strategic, statutory and policy planning documents which MAJOR RAINFALL EVENT - events greater than a minor
collectively outline the planning for an area and development rainfall event and up to and including the 1 per cent annual OPEN PLAN - dwelling layouts where spaces are not divided
requirements for sites, of the decision-maker and generally exceedance probability (AEP) event (refer Department of into discrete rooms but are open and connected to allow
include a scheme, local planning strategy (including any Water and Environmental Regulation). flexibility of use (typically living, dining, kitchen and study
housing component), structure plans, local development areas).
MINOR PROJECTION -
plans and local planning policies.
- in relation to the height of a building: a chimney, vent OPEN SPACE - generally that area of a lot not occupied by
LOCAL PLANNING POLICY –any policy prepared by a local pipe, aerial or other appurtenance of like scale; any building and includes:
government in accordance with the procedures set out in the - in relation to a wall: a rainwater pipe, vent pipe, eaves - open areas of accessible and useable flat roofs and
local planning scheme. overhang, cornice or other moulding or decorative outdoor living areas above natural ground level;
LOCAL PLANNING SCHEME - as defined under the Planning feature, provided that the projection does not exceed - areas beneath eaves;
and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 0.75m measured horizontally. - verandahs, patios or other such roofed structures not
2015. more than 0.5m above natural ground level, unenclosed
MINOR RAINFALL EVENT – rainfall events greater than small
on at least two sides, and covering no more than 10 per
LOCAL PLANNING STRATEGY - as defined under the rainfall events and less than major rainfall events (refer
cent of the site area or 50m2 whichever is the lesser;
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Department of Water and Environmental Regulation).
Regulations 2015; a document which supports the preparation - unroofed open structures such as pergolas;
and review of a local planning scheme in accordance with MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT - buildings that contain - uncovered driveways (including access aisles in car
Part 3 of the Planning and Development (Local Planning commercial and other non-residential uses in conjunction parking areas) and uncovered car parking spaces;
Schemes) Regulations 2015. with residential dwellings in a multiple dwelling
configuration. but excludes:
LOFT – a room or space within the roof space of a building. - non-accessible roofs, verandahs, balconies and outdoor
living areas over 1m above natural ground level; and/or
LOT - for single houses, a lot as defined under the Planning
and Development Act 2005, as amended. For multiple or - covered car parking spaces and covered walkways, areas
grouped dwellings, the parent lot. for rubbish disposal, stores, outbuildings or plant rooms.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 122

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A1 Definitions
(cont.)
OUTBUILDING - an enclosed non-habitable structure that PLOT RATIO AREA - the gross total area of all floors of PRIVATE OPEN SPACE - outdoor space located at ground
is detached from any dwelling and may include a detached buildings on a development site, including the area of any level or on a structure that is within private ownership
garage. internal and external walls but not including: and provided for the exclusive use of the occupants of
the dwelling to which it abuts and excludes car parking
OUTDOOR LIVING AREA - the area external to a single - the areas of any lift shafts;
spaces and access ways. It includes primary garden areas,
house, grouped or multiple dwelling to be used in - stairs or stair landings common to two or more dwellings; balconies, courtyards and terraces.
conjunction with that dwelling such that it is capable of active
- machinery, air conditioning and equipment rooms;
or passive use and is readily accessible from the dwelling. RESIDENTIAL BUILDING - a building or portion of a building,
- space that is wholly below natural ground level; together with rooms and outbuildings separate from such
PARAPET - the portion of a wall protruding above a roof or
- area used exclusively for the parking of wheeled vehicles building but incidental thereto; such building being used or
terrace. Often taken to refer to the decorative element which
at or below natural ground level; intended, adapted or designed to be used for the purpose of
establishes the street wall height of heritage buildings.
human habitation:
- storerooms;
PARENT LOT - relating to multiple or grouped dwellings, - temporarily by two or more persons; or
- lobbies, bin storage areas, passageways to bin storage
the lot inclusive of common areas to which the strata titles
areas or amenities areas common to more than one - permanently by seven or more persons, who do not
scheme relates.
dwelling; and comprise a single family, but does not include a hospital
PASSIVE SURVEILLANCE - actual and perceived monitoring - balconies, eaves, verandahs, courtyards and roof or sanatorium, a prison, a hotel, a motel or a residential
of public spaces by people as they go about their daily terraces. school.
activities. Commonly referred to as ‘eyes on the street’.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT - development of permanent
PORCH - a roofed open platform attached to the front of
PATIO - an unenclosed structure covered in an impervious a dwelling. accommodation for people, and may include all dwellings,
material which may or may not be attached to a dwelling. the residential component of mixed use development, and
PRECINCT STRUCTURE PLAN – as defined under the residential buildings proposing permanent accommodation.
PEDESTRIAN ACCESS LEG – provides access from a public Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
street to a dwelling where sole vehicular access is via a rear Regulations 2015. RIGHT-OF-WAY - a strip of land such as a laneway, available
right-of-way. It can be in the form of a portion of the rear lot either for use by the general public, or a restricted section of
or as common property in the case of a strata title scheme. PRIMARY GARDEN AREA - an external ground floor area for the community, and may be created by subdivision, specific
single house and grouped dwellings set aside on a site for transfer, or continued use over a period of years. They may
PERGOLA - an open-framed structure covered in a water the exclusive use of the occupants of the dwelling to which it be:
permeable material or operable louvred roofing, which may abuts. It may include (but is not limited to) landscaping, deep - private, where the land is created in a plan of subdivision
or may not be attached to a dwelling. soil areas and trees, paved areas and patios with a floor level and available to landowners that are legally entitled; or
PERMEABLE SURFACE/ PAVEMENT/ MATERIAL - surfaces not greater than 0.5m above natural ground level. - public, where the land has been vested in the Crown.
that permits the penetration of rainwater. PRIMARY LIVING SPACE – the identified room(s) within a
SCHEME - the local planning scheme that specifies zoning
PLOT RATIO - the ratio of the gross plot ratio area of dwelling that is the focus of life and activity and usually the and development standards gazetted pursuant to the
buildings on a development site to the area of land in the site largest room. This area is connected with private open space Planning and Development Act 2005.
boundaries. and may include any of the following room types: living room,
lounge room, family room, or an integrated open plan living SCHEME PLAN - has the meaning given by section 3 of the
area that has one of these room types together with a kitchen Strata Titles Act 1985, and for a strata titles scheme means
or dining area. the strata plan or survey-strata plan registered, or proposed
to be registered, for the strata titles scheme as a scheme
PRIMARY STREET - unless otherwise designated by the local
document.
government, the sole or principal public road that provides
access to the major entry (front door) to the dwelling or
building.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 123

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A1 Definitions
(cont.)
SCREENING/ SCREENED - permanently fixed external SINGLE HOUSE - a dwelling standing wholly on its own green SOLAR ACCESS - is the ability of a building to continue
perforated panels or trellises composed of solid or obscured title or survey-strata lot, together with any easement over to receive direct sunlight without obstruction from other
translucent panels. adjoining land for support of a wall or for access or services buildings or impediments, not including trees.
and excludes dwellings on titles with areas held in common
SECONDARY STREET - in the case of a site that has access SOLAR COLLECTORS - solar collecting components of the
property.
from more than one public road, a road that is not the primary following: thermal heating systems, photovoltaic systems and
street. SITE – skylights.
SENSE OF PLACE - the essential memorable and - In the case of a single house, the green title or SOURCE OF OVERLOOKING - major openings and active
recognisable characteristics of an area. survey-strata lot on which it stands. habitable space with a floor level of more than 0.5m above
SERVICE AREA - areas designated for building services - In the case of a grouped dwelling, the area occupied by natural ground level.
installed to make the building functional, comfortable, the dwelling together with any area allocated (whether SPECIAL PURPOSE DWELLING - includes ancillary dwelling,
efficient and safe. by way of strata title scheme or otherwise) for the aged or dependent persons’ dwelling, single bedroom
exclusive use or benefit of that dwelling. dwelling, accessible dwelling or a small dwelling.
SERVICE UTILITIES - supply and reticulation of
- In the case of a multiple dwelling or apartment
essential services including, but not limited to power, STANDARD STRUCTURE PLAN – as defined under the
development, the lot (or parent lot where the lot is
water, gas, wastewater, fire services, letterboxes and Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
subdivided under strata scheme) on which the dwellings
telecommunications. Regulations 2015.
stand.
SETBACK - the horizontal distance between a wall at any STORAGE - dedicated, secured and conveniently located
SITE AREA - the area of land required for the construction of
point and an adjacent lot boundary, measured at right angles areas for the storage of large or bulky items, but excludes
a dwelling to satisfy the requirements of the R-Codes.
(90 degrees) to the boundary. built-in furniture and internal storage located in areas such as
SITE COVER – the area occupied by any building, including kitchens, laundries, bathrooms and bedrooms.
SIGHTLINES - lines of clear physically uninterrupted sight.
upper storeys or balconies projecting beyond the ground
STOREY - the portion of a building which is situated between
SIGNIFICANT EXISTING TREE - an existing tree that meets floor building alignment, or other structures roofed with
the top of any floor and the top of the floor next above it and
the following criteria: impervious material, but excludes:
if there is no floor above it, that portion between the top of
- healthy specimens with ongoing viability; and - uncovered driveways and parking spaces; the floor and the ceiling above it but does not include:
- species is not included on a State or local area weed - eaves and pergolas; and - a basement;
register; and - a basement that is constructed wholly underground. - a space that contains only a lift shaft, stairway or meter
- height of at least 4m; and/or SITE RESPONSIVE - deriving from analysis of the physical room;
- trunk diameter of at least 160mm, measured 1m from the characteristics of an area (such as landform, views, prevailing - roof top terrace with no permanent impervious roof
ground; and/or breezes, environmental features) and to manage constraints structure;
- average canopy diameter of at least 4m; or and opportunities to create optimum design outcomes. - a mezzanine; or
- as specified with the local planning framework. SMALL DWELLING - a single house or grouped dwelling - a loft.
with an internal floor area no greater that 70m2; or a multiple Double height floors greater than 5m floor to ceiling are
SINGLE ASPECT – a dwelling or room with openings facing dwelling with an internal floor area no greater than 60m2. counted as two floors.
primarily in one direction from a single major external wall.
SMALL RAINFALL EVENT - the first 15mm of a rainfall event STORMWATER - urban surface water runoff from rainfall
SINGLE BEDROOM DWELLING - a dwelling that contains a (refer Department of Water and Environmental Regulation). events, consisting of rainfall runoff and any material (soluble
living room and no more than one other habitable room that
is capable of use as a bedroom. SOFT LANDSCAPE - any landscaped area with a minimum and insoluble) mobilised in its path of flow.
soil depth of 300mm that contains in-ground planting and STRATA LOT - refer to definition for a lot in a strata scheme.
excludes removable planter boxes/pots and permeable
paving areas. Turf is included. STRATA PLAN - has the meaning given by section 3 of the
Strata Titles Act 1985.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 124

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A1 Definitions
(cont.)
STRATA SCHEME - has the meaning given by section 3 of the SURVEY-STRATA SCHEME - has the meaning given by WALKABLE CATCHMENT - the actual area served within
Strata Titles Act 1985 and may include freehold or leasehold section 3 of the Strata Titles Act 1985, and may include a walking distance along the street/footpath network
schemes. freehold or leasehold schemes. measured from a public transport stop/station entrance.
STRATA TITLES SCHEME - has the meaning given by section SUSTAINABILITY/SUSTAINABLE - meeting the needs of WALL - the vertical external face of a constructed building
3 of the Strata Titles Act 1985. current and future generations through the integration of comprising solid building material and including enclosures to
environmental protection, social advancement and economic verandahs and balconies.
STREET - any public road, communal street, private street,
prosperity.
laneway, right- of-way or other shared access way that WAPC - Western Australian Planning Commission.
provides the principal frontage to a dwelling but does not TEN DESIGN PRINCIPLES - means the Design Principles
WINTER SOLAR GAIN - the heating of the building interior
include an access leg to a single battleaxe lot. as set out by State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of the Built
due to sunlight penetration through windows or heating of the
Environment: Schedule 1.
STREET BOUNDARY - the boundary between the land building mass.
comprising a street and the lands that abuts thereon. TERRACE - an outdoor area, usually paved and unroofed, that
is connected to a dwelling and accessible from at least one
STREETSCAPE - the visible components in a street between
room. May be at-grade or on a structure such as a podium or
the facing buildings, including the form of the buildings,
a roof.
garages, setbacks, fencing, driveways, utilities, street
surfaces, street trees and street furniture such as lighting, UNENCLOSED - an area bounded on no more than two sides
signs, barriers and bus shelters. by a permanent wall and covered in a water impervious
material.
STREET SETBACK - the horizontal distance between the
street boundary and a building, measured at right angles (90 UNIVERSALLY ACCESSIBLE/ UNIVERSAL ACCESS -
degrees) to the street boundary. features to enable use and access by people with disability.
STREET SETBACK AREA - the area between the street UNIVERSAL DESIGN - the design of products and
boundary and a building (excluding retaining walls) up to the environments that are inherently accessible to all, including
street setback line. for older people and people with disability.
STREET SETBACK LINE – the minimum distance between UTILITIES - external fixtures, equipment, plant or other
the street boundary and a building in accordance with structures which are necessary for a dwelling to achieve
Part B, Table B and Part C, Table 3.3a. efficient, comfortable and environmentally sustainable
operating outcomes and includes service and functional
STRUCTURE PLAN - as defined under the Planning and
utilities or other fixtures as necessary for the residential use
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015.
of the buildings on site. It excludes essential plumbing vents
STUDIO - a dwelling consisting of one habitable room that above the roof line and external roof-water down pipes.
combines kitchen, living and sleeping space.
VERANDAH - a roofed open platform attached to a dwelling.
SUNLIGHT - direct beam radiation from the sun.
VISUALLY PERMEABLE - in reference to a wall, gate, door,
SURVEY-STRATA LOT - refer to definition for lot in a screen or fence that the vertical surface, when viewed
survey-strata scheme. directly from the street or other public space, has:
- continuous vertical or horizontal gaps of 50mm or greater
SURVEY-STRATA PLAN - has the meaning given by section 3
width occupying not less than one third of the total
of the Strata Titles Act 1985.
surface area;
- continuous vertical or horizontal gaps less than 50mm
in width, occupying at least one half of the total surface
area in aggregate; or
- a surface offering equal or lesser obstruction to view.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 125

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A1 Definitions
(cont.)
Figure A1.1 Climate Zones Map, extracted from Climatic Zone Map of Australia published by Australian Building Codes Board
ClimaCtilcim Zaotniecs Z -o Wneesst -e Wrn eAsutsetrrna lAiaustralia
Zone 1Z -o Hniegh 1 h- uHmigidhi thyu smumidmitye rs, uwmarmme wr,i nwtaerrm winter
Zone 2Z -o Wnea r2m - hWumarimd shuummmide rs, ummildm weirn, mteirl d winter
(NA to( NWAA )to WA)
Zone 3 - Hot dry summer, warm winter
Zone 3 - Hot dry summer, warm winter
Zone 4 - Hot dry summer, cool winter
Zone 4 - Hot dry summer, cool winter
Zone 5 - Warm temperate
Zone 5 - Warm temperate
Zone 6 - Mild temperate
Zone 6 - Mild temperate
Zone 7 - Cool temperate (NA to WA)
Zone 7 - Cool temperate (NA to WA)
Zone 8 - Alpine (NA to WA)
Zone 8 - Alpine (NA to WA)
Local Government Area Boundary
Local Government Area Boundary
Extracted from Climatic Zone map of Australia
published by ABCB (last amendment August 2015)
Extracted from Climatic Zone map of Australia
published by ABCB (last amendment August 2015)
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 126

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A2 Context and site analysis
The list below outlines the recommended documentation to assist in the preparation of context and site analysis and design response. The level of detail provided in a context and site analysis
should be appropriate to the scale and complexity of the proposed development.
Category Materials
A plan or aerial photo showing the site in relation to neighbourhood context including the location of:
Neighbourhood i. public open space and bushland, such as parks and sporting ovals
context ii. transport within a 5-10 minute walk.
Include walkable catchments from the site (show a 400m radius and 800m radius circle from the site)
Plan(s), photographs or other documentation of features of the street context, including properties adjoining the development site and on the other side of the street, to show:
i. surrounding built form patterns and typologies, including existing and proposed building envelopes and heights (storeys and metres), important datum lines of adjacent buildings, setbacks
and subdivision pattern
ii. patterns of building frontages, street setbacks and side setbacks
iii. streetscape including land uses and planned development, staging or redevelopment outcomes
Street context iv. movement and access for vehicles (including service vehicles), pedestrians, bicycle riders and mobility scooters
v. topography, landscape, open spaces and vegetation
vi. significant views to and from the site
vii. any sources of nuisance emissions in the vicinity of the site such as noise, light, and odour, that may have a bearing on the residential proposal, particularly vehicular traffic, train, aircraft and
industrial noise
viii. location of relevant heritage places or features, areas of environmental significance, and elements of cultural significance
A site plan showing at scale the following features:
i. lot boundaries, site dimensions, site area, north point, street frontage, street name, lot number and address
ii. climate zone, prevailing breezes, and shadows from natural or built features
iii. geotechnical conditions including rock outcrops, watercourses
iv. topography showing relative levels (Australian Height Datum) and contours at 0.5 metre intervals for the site and across site boundaries where level changes exist
v. unique geological features, such as watercourses, bores and rock outcrops
Site context vi. location, type and size of significant existing trees and/or significant landscaping features on site and on adjoining streets and properties, including relative levels where relevant
vii. location, use, dimensions, setback distances of existing buildings or built features (including outbuildings, retaining walls and other structures) on the site
viii. locations and levels of existing buildings and structures on adjacent lots that might affect, or be affected by, the proposed development, including habitable room windows, solar collectors,
and designated primary garden areas or private open space, walls and fences, parapets and ridge lines, and any other relevant features
ix. pedestrian and vehicular access points, driveways and features such as crossovers, truncations, service poles, transit stops, fire hydrants and access restrictions (e.g. road islands adjacent to
the site)
x. location of services utilities and infrastructure, including water, gas, power, solar collectors, telecommunications, sewerage and drainage, and accompanying inspection points and easements
Design
Sketches, drawings or diagrams as needed, to demonstrate response to context and site.
response
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 127

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A3 Application documentation
The list below outlines the documentation recommended to be submitted for an application for residential development under R-Codes Volume 1. Proponents should also refer to application
requirements that may be specific to a decision-maker. The recommended material is in addition to that required under cl. 63, part 8 in Schedule 2 of the Regulations. Some of the material will not
be relevant for all applications and material should be prepared and submitted that is appropriate for site specific reasons such as scale, complexity or design approach. Early consultation should be
undertaken with the decision-maker to confirm application documentation requirements. Where the application is for an addition or alteration to an existing dwelling, the material submitted should
relate to the alteration or addition. Where a development application is not required, only the site context (from Appendix A2), site plan and the development drawings (Appendix A3) are required
to demonstrate compliance with the deemed-to-comply provisions.
Application requirements legend
Information necessary to inform assessment
Information may be needed dependent on circumstances
Information unlikely to be required
Proposal Type
Part C
Part B & C Part C Multiple
Category Materials Part B Addition or Single house dwelling or
larger scale
All residential alteration or grouped
grouped
development to existing dwelling (less
dwellings (10 or
dwelling than 10)
more) or mixed
proposals
Summary table or document of key details of the development proposal, including the following:
i. compliance of proposal with objective and relevant provisions of local planning framework for development site
Development ii. proposed average and minimum site areas
proposal iii. number, height, mix, size and accessibility of dwellings
summary
iv. building height
v. number of parking spaces for occupants, visitors, bicycles and motorcycle/scooters (where required by decision-
maker)
Context and
site analysis
Documentation prepared during the project investigation phase. Refer A2 Context and site analysis.
and design
response
SPP 7.0 Design
A statement of key points to document how the proposal satisfies the ten design principles of State Planning Policy 7.0
Principles
Design of the Built Environment.
statement
R-Codes Justification for where an element design principle pathway is to apply, rather than the deemed-to-comply provision.
Volume
1 Design This justification may refer to the findings from the context and site analysis, intent, SPP 7.0 ten design principles, and local
Principles planning framework and R Codes Volume 1 objectives as justification in support of the design principle pathway.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 128

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A3 Application documentation
(cont.)
Proposal Type
Part C
Part B & C Part C Multiple
Category Materials Part B dwelling or
Addition or Single house
larger scale
All residential alteration or grouped
grouped
development to existing dwelling (less
dwellings (10 or
dwelling than 10)
more) or mixed
proposals
Other i. Waste Management Plan
supporting ii. Traffic Impact Assessment or Statement
information iii. Illustrative views
(where iv. Universal design compliance checklist and annotated plans
required by the
v. Arboriculture report where removal of a significant existing tree is proposed
decision-
maker)
Scale drawing (typically 1:100) showing:
i. property details, lot/site boundaries (including for any proposed strata lots), site dimensions, site area(s), street
frontage(s), street name(s), lot number(s) and address and north point
ii. existing contours at maximum 0.5m intervals and/or spot levels (Australian Height Datum (AHD))
iii. the position and levels (AHD) of proposed and existing buildings, street fences, retaining walls and other structures
iv. location and size of private open spaces (including the primary garden area) and including areas to be landscaped
v. the position and size of any existing or proposed trees (indicating whether being retained, new or removed) and/or
other significant landscaping features
vi. the position and size of soft landscaping areas and deep soil area (where this is not included in a separate
landscaping plan)
vii. proposed finished site levels
viii. the position and dimensions of access-ways for pedestrians and vehicles (including swept paths/turning circles
Site plan where communal driveways are proposed), and the position and dimensions of on site and off site car parking spaces,
demonstration of vehicle sightlines
ix. the position and floor levels (AHD) of major openings to any active habitable spaces in a wall of an adjoining
building, private open spaces, and primary garden areas on adjoining properties, where within 7.5m of a boundary
of the development site
x. the horizontal position and floor levels (AHD) of all sources of overlooking of existing and proposed building(s)
where within 7.5m of a lot boundary
xi. cones of vision for each source of overlooking, line of sight from any sources of overlooking (where required) and/or
details of measures proposed to reduce overlooking of the adjoining properties
xii. street verge considerations such as the location of any street trees, power poles, drainage pits, crossovers, footpaths
or any other relevant obstructions
xiii. shadow that would be cast at noon on 21 June by any proposed building onto any adjoining or diagonally adjacent
properties
xiv. sources of noise, light impacts (eg. non-residential developments)
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 129

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A3 Application documentation
(cont.)
Proposal Type
Part C
Part B & C Part C Multiple
Category Materials Part B dwelling or
Addition or Single house
larger scale
All residential alteration or grouped
grouped
development to existing dwelling (less
dwellings (10 or
dwelling than 10)
more) or mixed
proposals
Scale drawing (typically 1:100) showing:
i. all floor plans, including wall lengths, articulation and their distances from the boundaries of the site
ii. internal floor plans and layouts for proposed dwellings/extensions – this includes window position, indicative
furniture layouts, room areas and dimensions, room names
iii. a solar diagram showing solar access for the primary living space
iv. location and dimension of primary garden areas, deep soil areas, private open spaces
v. location and dimension of service areas and storage areas, waste management areas and parking spaces
vi. all elevations showing- natural ground levels with contours at maximum intervals of 0.5m, finished floor levels, wall
Development
drawings heights and total building heights (AHD), areas (m2) of windows to habitable rooms, all privacy devices, utilities
vii. proposed materials, colours and finishes of the exterior of the development, including façade, roof and dwelling
entries
viii. cross-sections through any proposed areas of excavation or fill with the relevant natural and proposed ground levels
(AHD), contours at maximum intervals of 0.5m
ix. ceiling heights for habitable rooms and non-habitable rooms (multiple dwellings only)
x. site plans, floor plans and accompanying information to identify which dwellings are to meet the universal design
standards and demonstrating compliance with the relevant provisions of accessible dwellings AS4299 and Livable
Housing Design Guidelines
Scale drawing (typically 1:100) showing:
i. the development footprint and site boundary
ii. street tree location
iii. existing on site trees to be removed and trees to be retained, including trunk, canopy size and deep soil areas
iv. position and size (canopy and height) of trees on adjoining properties
v. position, species, and size of proposed trees to be planted on site including the size and dimensions of deep soil
Landscape plan areas
(where required
vi. position, type, and size of proposed soft landscaping, including groundcovers and shrubs and/or significant
by the R-Codes)
landscaping features
vii. communal open spaces where provided
viii. the position of built landscape elements, including fences, pathways, swimming pools and spas, pergolas, walls,
retaining walls, planters and water features
ix. type of permeable, semi-permeable and impervious surfaces including roof cover and ground surfaces
x. stormwater management and irrigation concept design
xi. site lighting
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 130

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A4 Universal design requirements
The checklist of universal design requirements below are adapted from the Livable Housing Design Guidelines and the Australian Building Codes Board Livable Housing Design Standard 2022.
They are intended to ensure a minimum level of universal design at the development application stage, but do not guarantee universal design certification upon construction.
Achieved? Achieved?
Silver level requirements Gold level requirements
(Y/N) (Y/N)
1. Dwelling access 1a. Provide a continuous path of travel to a dwelling entrance door from: 1a. As for silver.
i. the street boundary;
ii. a garage or carport for the exclusive use of the occupants of the dwelling;
or
iii. a car parking space within the lot for the exclusive use of the occupants of
the dwelling.
1b. The continuous path of travel in 1a is provided a pathway with a minimum 1m width 1b. As for silver except, replace the minimum clear
and has: pathway width of 1000mm with 1100mm.
i. no steps;
ii. a crossfall of not more than 1:40; and
iii. a maximum pathway slope of 1:14.
1c. Where an associated unenclosed car parking space for the dwelling is provided, at 1c. As for silver except, insert the following additional
least one space must provide a continuous path of travel referred to in 1a and have requirements:
a: i. a vertical clearance over the parking space of at
least 2500mm; and
i. minimum unobstructed dimension of 3200mm width and 5400mm length;
and ii. a covered parking space to ensure protection
from the weather.
ii. gradient not more than 1:40, or 1:33 for bitumen.
1d. One step ramp may be incorporated at a dwelling entrance door and is to have a: 1d. As for silver.
i. height of not more than 190mm;
ii. maximum gradient of 1:10;
iii. minimum clear width of 1000mm; and
iv. maximum length of 1900m.
1e. Where a ramp is provided in accordance with 1b or 1d, a level landing is to be 1e. As for sillver.
provided with a minimum 1200mm length, (exclusive of the swing of the door or
gate), to be provided at the head and foot of the ramp.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 131

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A4 Universal design requirements
(cont.)
Achieved? Achieved?
Silver level requirements Gold level requirements
(Y/N) (Y/N)
2. Dwelling 2a. The dwelling to provide an entrance door that is sheltered from the weather with a 2a. As for silver level except replace (i) with minimum clear
entrance minimum clear opening width of 820mm with a: door opening width of 850mm.
i. level threshold;
ii. sill height of not more than 5mm if the lip is rounded or beveled; or
iii. ramped threshold that does not exceed 56mm in height, with a maximum
gradient of 1:8 and is at least as wide as the minimum clear opening width of
the doorway it serves.
2a (ii-iii) not required to be shown at Planning Application stage.
2b. An entrance door with a space at least 1200mm x 1200mm to the external side of the 2b. As for silver level except replace with a level landing area
door that is: of at least 1350mm x 1350mm.
i. unobstructed (excluding a screen door); and
ii. level, or with a gradient not more than 1:40
2b (ii) not required to be shown at Planning Application stage.
3. Internal doors 3a. Internal doorways to rooms on the entry level used for living, dining, bedroom, 3a. As for the silver level except replace (i) with a minimum
and corridors bathroom, kitchen, laundry and toileting purposes to provide a minimum clear clear opening width of 850mm.
opening width of 820mm and have a:
i. level threshold;
ii. sill height of not more than 5mm if the lip is rounded or beveled; or
iii. ramped threshold that does not exceed 56mm in height, with a maximum
gradient of 1:8 and is at least as wide as the minimum clear opening width of
the doorway it serves.
3a (ii-iii) not required to be shown at Planning Application stage.
3b. Internal corridors/passageways to the doorways referred to in 3a to provide a 3b. As for the silver level except replace with a minimum
minimum clear width of 1000mm. corridor/passageway width of 1200mm.
4. Toilet 4a. Dwellings have a toilet on the ground (or entry) level that provides: 4a. As for silver level except, replace (i) with:
i. a minimum clear width of 900mm between the opposite walls either side of i. with a minimum clear width of 1200mm between
the toilet pan (if located in a separate room); and the walls of the bathroom if located in a separate
ii. a minimum 1200mm circulation space from the front edge of the toilet pan room, or between amenities if located in a
to the swing arc of the door. combined bathroom.
iii. Where the toilet is provided in a bathroom, the centreline of the toilet pan is
located between 450mm and 460mm from the finished surface of a wall or
structure, or from any other fixed obstruction (such as a basin or vanity unit).
4a (ii) not required to be shown at Planning Application stage.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 132

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A4 Universal design requirements
(cont.)
Achieved? Achieved?
Silver level requirements Gold level requirements
(Y/N) (Y/N)
5. Shower 5a. At least one shower to have a hobless and step-free entry with a lip not more than 5a. As for silver level except the hobless shower recess
5mm in height. Refer AS3740-3.6 for hobless specifications. Note: waterproofing described in 5a to:
requirements of the NCC apply. i. be located in a bathroom on the ground (or entry)
level;
5a not required to be shown at Planning Application stage.
ii. provide minimum dimensions of 900mm width
and 900mm length; and
iii. provide a clear space of at least 1200mm width
and 1200mm length forward of the shower recess
entry.
6. Reinforcement 6a. Walls to be reinforced to support the future installation of grab rails, if needed, and 6a. As for silver.
of bathroom & apply to walls adjacent to a:
toilet walls i. shower subject to 5a;
ii. bath (if provided) in the same bathroom as a shower subject to 5a; and
iii. toilet pan subject to 4a.
Walls constructed of solid masonry, concrete, or another material capable of
supporting grabrails may not require additional reinforcement.
6a not required to be shown at Planning Application stage.
7. Internal 7a. No silver level requirement. 7a. Stairways in dwellings to be:
Stairways i. a minimum clear width of 1000mm;
ii. straight in design; and
iii. positioned adjoining a load bearing wall.
7a (iii) not required to be shown at Planning Application
stage
8. Kitchen and 8a. No silver level requirement. 8a. Kitchen and laundry spaces to be designed to support
laundry spaces ease of movement and adaptation with:
i. at least 1200mm clearance in front of fixed
benches and appliances (excluding handles).
9. Ground (or entry 9a. No silver level requirement. 9a. The dwelling is to provide a bedroom on the ground (or
level) bedroom entry) level that:
space i. is a minimum 10m2 internal floor area; and
ii. is a minimum dimension of 3m.
Note: minimum area and dimensions are exclusive of
robes.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 133

CONTENTS | PART A | PART B | PART C | PART D | APPENDICES
A1 Definitions | A2 Context and site analysis | A3 Application documentation | A4 Universal design requirements
A4 Universal design requirements
(cont.)
Achieved? Achieved?
Silver level requirements Gold level requirements
(Y/N) (Y/N)
10. Switches and 10a. No silver level requirement. 10a. Light switches to be positioned in a consistent location:
powerpoints i. between 900mm – 1100mm above the finished
floor level; and
ii. horizontally aligned with the door handle at the
entrance to a room.
10a not required to be shown at Planning Application
stage.
10b. No silver level requirement. 10b. Powerpoints to be installed not lower than 300mm above
the finished floor level.
11. Door and tap 11a. No silver level requirement. 11a. Doorways to include door hardware installed at between
hardware 900mm – 1100mm above the finished floor.
11a not required to be shown at Planning Application
stage.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN CODES VOLUME 1 134