72/2009
Planning Bulletin 72/2009
Child Care Centres
August 2009
1 Purpose The child care centre guidelines • exercise duty of care to ensure
have been revised as a result of that the site is suitable for use
This planning bulletin outlines the
submissions received following as a child care service;
revised child care centre guidelines
the release of planning bulletin 72
and aims to: • seek and consider any
in June 2005. During the public
information held by DEC about
a) differentiate between child care advertising period a total of 19
the contamination status of the
related activities operating in submissions were received. While
site; and
existing residential area, such as these submissions were generally
family day care that takes place supportive, further refinements and • seek and consider any
in dwellings, and non-residential improvements were identified and other information about the
child care activities; have been incorporated, where contamination status of the
appropriate. The planning bulletin site, irrespective of whether
b) outline a consistent policy is intended to provide a guidance or not it has been reported to
approach to planning for child document for decision-makers, DEC under the Contamination
care centres; and developers and the community for Sites Act 2003.
use when planning for child care
c) advise of planning Further information about the
centres.
considerations in relation to the Contaminated Sites Act 2003 can be
location and development of Site contamination obtained from DEC on
child care centres. 1300 762 982.
The commencement of the
The bulletin has been prepared in Contaminated Sites Act 2003 on 1 Supply and demand for child care
consultation with the Department December 2006 has created new services
for Child Protection, Department for statutory obligations for land users
The ever-increasing demand
Communities, Department of Health and has highlighted the importance
for child care centres and the
(DOH), Department of Environment of preventing the development of
strong focus on their appropriate
and Conservation (DEC) and local child care services on land that is
distribution and location is closely
government. unsuitable for this use because of
linked to demographic change. In
soil and groundwater contamination
The bulletin supersedes Planning the past 30 years, the population
at or near the site.
Bulletin 72 Child Care Centres (June of the state has almost doubled to
2005) and the planning guidelines The Contaminated Sites Act 2003, about two million and is expected
included in it. which is administered by the DEC, to rise to approximately three million
requires that known or suspected by 2031, while households also
contaminates sites are reported to are becoming more diverse. There
2 Background DEC by: is a trend for both parents to work
due to economic pressures, which
The community and local
• an owner or occupier of a site; creates a greater demand for child
government have raised issues
relating to the location and • a person who caused care services. Consequently, the
development of child care centres, or contributed to the availability of child care centres in
including centre-based care, family contamination of a site; or close proximity to the workplace is
becoming more important.
day care, outside school hours care,
• an auditor engaged to
vocational care and occasional
investigate and report on site The rising demand for child
care. A need has been identified
contamination in accordance care services means that these
for a consistent planning approach,
with the Contaminated Sites businesses are becoming larger and
with particular regard to location,
Act 2003. have a potentially greater impact.
site characteristics, environmental
Larger child care centres also
suitability, design, traffic, access, Any party considering development
tend to have a greater catchment
noise and health impacts, and of a child care service must obtain
area which may, in some cases,
safety issues, which could provide and consider any information
lead to overprovision of facilities.
guidance when considering DEC has about the contamination
Oversupply in some areas may
proposals for child care centres. status of a given site. It should be
result in increased vacancy levels
emphasised that the absence of a
that may affect the viability and
A number of recent decisions by
report to DEC is no guarantee that a
quality of the services provided.
the State Administrative Tribunal
site is uncontaminated. In summary,
have highlighted the lack of policy
proposals for the development of a There is increasing evidence of an
or shortcomings of existing local
child care service must: oversupply of child care services
policies on child care centres.
in many outer urban areas across
the Perth metropolitan region, but

in areas of high land value (where 3.1 Introduction c) located in areas where adjoining
the need for these facilities is often uses are compatible with a child
This policy focuses on matters
greater), such as in or around the care centre (includes considering
pertaining to the proper location,
central business district, there has all permissible uses under the
considerations and standards that
been minimal development of new zoning of adjoining properties);
should apply to the development
child care centres.
of child care centres. A child care d) serviced by public transport
Child care centres provide a much centre is defined as premises used (where available);
needed community function, for the daily or occasional care of
but many are operated as a children in accordance with the e) considered suitable from a traffic
commercial venture, with market regulations for child care under the engineering/safety point of view;
forces influencing the location Child Care Services Act 2007. Child and
and availability of the service. care centres are non-residential land
f) of sufficient size and dimension
While the Western Australian uses providing an educational and
to accommodate the
Planning Commission (WAPC) community support function mainly
development without affecting
strongly supports the provision of in residential and employment areas.
the amenity of the area.
necessary facilities, it is important
The purpose of the policy is to
to emphasise that the need for a Child care centres generally would
provide guidance to decision-
service does not justify development not be suitable where:
makers, developers and the
in inappropriate locations.
community for use when planning g) soil contamination exceeds the
Planning for child care centres for child care centres. It is levels regarded by DEC and
acknowledged that development DOH as suitable for standard
Broadly, child care centre activities requirements in the city and inner residential land uses with
are located in residential areas; urban areas are quite different to accessible soils as published
however, there is a growing trend those in outer suburban areas, in guideline Assessment Levels
for these services to be located and the guidelines should be for Soil, Sediment and Water
elsewhere. administered accordingly. Department of Environment,
November 2003);
Typically, where child care centre
activities appear in local planning 3.2 Objectives
h) groundwater is to be abstracted
schemes, the use is listed as
The objectives of this policy are to: for the irrigation of gardens
discretionary under a particular
and play area within the child
zoning category and, consequently, a) locate child care centres care centre and groundwater
requires planning approval. Local appropriately in relation to their contamination exceeds 10
government in exercising discretion surrounding service area; x Australian drinking water
may require proposals to be
criteria in accordance with the
advertised and external advice may b) minimise the impact a child care
Contaminated Sites Reporting
be sought in relation to specialised centre has on its surrounds,
Guideline for chemicals in
matters such as noise or pollution. in particular on the amenity of
groundwater (DOH 2006);
existing residential areas;
The Child Care Services Act 2007
i) the service provided by the
contains regulations that address c) minimise the impact the
centre will have a demonstrable,
matters such as staffing, equipment, surrounds may have on a child
adverse impact on the existing
indoor and outdoor space care centre; and
or planned level of child care
requirements, shade, fencing, and
d) consider the health and safety of centre services enjoyed by the
health and safety. In addition, many
children attending the child care local community;
local governments have policies
centre within the confines of the
dealing with the development of j) access is from a major road or
planning system.
child care centres, which address in close proximity to a major
a range of matters such as building intersection where there may be
design, setbacks and car parking 3.3 Location of child care centres safety concerns;
ratios specific to each locality.
The appropriate location of a child k) access is from a local access
The Federal Government also has care centre is crucial in meeting street which may impact on the
regulations relating to the operation the needs of children and their amenity of the area due to traffic
of child care centres and services families. It also is crucial in limiting and parking;
through the requirements in its child the impact a child care centre may
care accreditation system. While this have on surrounding activities and l) the current use or any
system mainly focuses on service vice versa. permissible use under the
zoning of the adjoining premises
delivery, it does outline additional
This may be achieved by locating produces unacceptable levels
requirements with regard to child
child care centres on sites that are: of noise, fumes or emissions
health, environmental health and
or poses a potential hazard by
child safety. a) distributed strategically to
reason of activities or materials
provide the maximum benefit to
stored on-site;
the community it serves;
3 Policy guidance
m) noise produced by roads,
b) within easy walking distance or
The following section provides railways and aircraft are likely to
part of appropriate commercial,
policy provisions to guide local have an adverse impact on the
recreation or community nodes
governments in the preparation of site; and/or
and education facilities;
scheme provisions and local policies
on child care centres.
2

n) the site is in a heavy industry relevant local policy and any unique 3.7 Noise impacts
area or in the buffer area of a circumstances relating to the
A noise impact assessment may be
heavy industry area. proposed development, such as
required for the development of a
reciprocal parking arrangements,
child care centre.
available public transport and street
3.4 Site characteristics parking. Vehicles will be required to The objectives should be to limit
Sites selected for child care centres enter and exit the site in a forward the noise impact of the child care
should be of sufficient size and gear, and there may be additional centre on adjacent properties,
suitable shape to accommodate the requirements resulting from a traffic and also limit any noise impact
development, including all buildings impact assessment. from external sources on the child
and structures, parking for staff care centre. This may be achieved
Outdoor play areas should be in a
and parents, outdoor play areas either by physical separation,
safe location on the site, and away
and landscaping, as determined by design and layout of the centre or
from any adjoining noise-sensitive
the relevant local planning scheme by implementing noise-mitigation
premises, such as dwellings and
or local policy and applicable measures, such as acoustic
nursing homes.
regulations. As a general rule sites treatments to buildings.
in a residential area should be of Landscaping should be provided in
As a general rule, the hours of
regular shape and greater than 1000 accordance with the relevant local
operation of a child care centre
sqm. planning scheme or relevant local
should be limited to between the
policy or applicable regulations. In
The topography of the site hours of 7 am and 7 pm weekdays
the absence of any such provisions,
and surrounds should also be and on Saturdays, unless otherwise
landscaping will be required
considered as steep slopes may agreed to with the local government.
along the street frontage of the
affect access to the facility, noise
development to a standard equal Although each application will need
transfer and methods of noise
to that required or provided for on to be assessed on its merits, the
mitigation.
adjacent properties. Landscaping following basic principles apply:
Sites selected for child care should not include potentially
centres should also be assessed to hazardous heights, landscape a) Where a child care centre is
determine their potential for soil and fittings, and potentially toxic plants. located adjacent to a noise-
sensitive use, such as houses,
groundwater contamination. Section
retirement villages and nursing
6 of the DEC’s Contaminated Sites
3.6 Traffic impacts homes, the noise-generating
and the Land Use Planning Process
(April 2006) guideline sets out a A traffic impact statement/ activities of the child care centre,
useful methodology to assist local assessment should be required for such as the outdoor play areas,
governments in carrying out such the development of a child care parking areas and any plant and
assessments. centre. equipment, are to be located
away from the noise-sensitive
The licence to operate a child care This statement/assessment should use.
centre, issued under the regulations address:
b) Where, due to design limitations
(Child Care Services Act 2007) limits
a) the site characteristics and or safety considerations, noise-
the number of children the centre
surrounding area; generating activities such as
can accommodate.
outdoor play areas are located
b) the proposal and its expected
close to noise-sensitive uses,
trip generation;
3.5 Design of centres appropriate noise mitigation is to
be undertaken.
The visual appearance of the child c) parking requirements, including
care centre, including any signage, the design of parking areas, c) As there is now a considerable
building design, colour, scale, shape and any pick-up and drop-off body of research that
and form, should be in accordance facilities; demonstrates the negative
with the local government local impact of inappropriate noise on
d) existing traffic conditions and
planning scheme or relevant local child development, the design
any future changes expected to
policy and applicable regulations. and construction of buildings
the traffic conditions;
In the absence of any specific may include noise-mitigation
provisions, the visual appearance e) current road safety conditions, measures to reduce impact from
of the development should reflect including a crash history in the external sources and to achieve
the character of the area, enhance locality; and accepted indoor noise limits.
its amenity and be considered
appropriate for regular use by f) the expected impact of the
children. proposed development on 3.8 Need for child care centres
the existing and future traffic
Legal decisions have discounted
Parking areas should be located in conditions.
the requirement for an applicant
front of the building. If this is not
possible they should be clearly A child care centre should to prove the need for commercial
visible and easily accessible be approved only if it can be facility, for example through market
from the entry to the site. As a demonstrated that it will have a surveys, as part of the planning
general rule, the minimum parking minimal impact on the functionality approval process. However, if there
requirement for a child care centre, and amenity of an area and will not is a demonstrable impact on the
including staff parking, will be create or exacerbate any unsafe amenity of an area or the level of
one space per five children. The conditions for children and families service enjoyed by a community,
number of parking bays may be using the centre, or for pedestrians then this is a relevant local planning
varied by the local government or road users. consideration.
given the specific provisions of
the local planning scheme or
3

Accordingly, the WAPC is of the of landscaping, and should be legislation. Such applications for
view that, although a proponent contacted for further information. review must be lodged with the
does not have to demonstrate there tribunal within the prescribed time
is sufficient demand for the activity, and in accordance with the rules
3.11 Application requirements
there may be a need to show that and regulations of the tribunal.
the development will not have an In addition to completion of the
Applicants considering making
adverse impact on the amenity of mandatory application form and
such an application for review
the area or the level of service to fees, applications for child care
should consult the tribunal and, if
the community by similar existing or centres should be accompanied by:
necessary, a legal practitioner or
approved facilities.
a) a written statement outlining the other appropriate professional in
In such instances, and depending number of children proposed, relation to commencement and
on the scale of the proposal, the age group breakdown, days conduct of a review.
applicant may be asked to provide and hours of operation and staff
further information in regard to requirement;
the level of existing services in the 4 Comment and further
locality, proximity to other centres, b) a location plan depicting information
population catchments for the surrounding lots and road layout;
new centre and the number of Further information, any enquiries
primary schools and kindergartens c) a site contour survey plan or correspondence on this planning
in the locality, in relation to the prepared by a licensed land bulletin should be directed to:
surveyor, indicating the location
development of a new facility.
of the proposed building and
Director
3.9 Consultation existing buildings and structures
Policy Development and
on adjacent sites;
Appropriate consultation should Coordination
be undertaken to consider the d) a detailed site plan to a scale Department of Planning
likely impact a child care centre sufficient to identify clearly the Albert Facey House
may have on the amenity of boundaries and all proposed 469 Wellington Street
an existing residential area. A structures, external play areas;
Perth WA 6000
minimum requirement should landscaping, refuse storage
be for the local government or area, car parking, pedestrian
the applicant to advise adjoining and vehicle access ways, quoting file reference
neighbours in writing and display crossover/s and kerb locations, WAPC/09/0014
public advertisements on the site, verge width and associated
in accordance with the public road infrastructure (eg light Disclaimer
notification procedures of the local poles, traffic islands) for the full
government. road reserve width for all roads This document has been published by the
abutting the application site; Western Australian Planning Commission. Any
Where the location of a child care representation, statement, opinion or advice
centre was predetermined in a e) floor plans and elevations to all expressed or implied in this publication is
structure plan, or similar wide- sides of the proposed building made in good faith and on the basis that the
government, its employees and agents are
ranging site assessment completed to a minimum scale of 1:100, or not liable for any damage or loss whatsoever
prior to any residential development such other scale as required by which may occur as a result of action taken or
in the vicinity, comprehensive the decision-making authority; not taken, as the case may be in respect of any
consultation on a planning representation, statement, opinion or advice
f) a traffic impact statement/
application may not be necessary. referred to herein. Professional advice should
assessment, if required by the be obtained before applying the information
decision-making authority; contained in this document to particular
3.10 Implementation circumstances.
g) a noise impact assessment, if
This policy provides guidance to required by the decision-making © State of Western Australia
decision-making authorities on the authority;
Published by the
location and development of the
h) a signage strategy; Western Australian Planning Commission
child care centres.
Albert Facey House
i) if the site has been used for a 469 Wellington Street
Development of a child care centre
potentially contaminating activity Perth WA 6000
usually requires planning approval
the information listed in section
from the local government, or in Published August 2009
6 of DEC’s Contaminated Sites
some cases the WAPC, and a
and Land Use Planning Process
licence from the Department for ISSN 1324-9142
(available on the DEC website at
Communities, pursuant to the
www.dec.wa.gov.au ); and website: www.planning.wa.gov.au
relevant regulations for child care
email: corporate@planning.wa.gov.au
under the Child Care Services Act
j) any additional information
2007. The regulations address relevant to the assessment of tel: 08 9264 7777
a wide range of issues including the application. fax: 08 9264 7566
indoor and outdoor space TTY: 08 9264 7535
requirements, shade, fencing, some infoline: 1800 626 477
internal structural requirements and 3.12 Review
This document is available in alternative formats
environmental health needs.
If a planning application for a on application to WAPC Communication
Local governments have local child care centre is refused or an Services
planning schemes or relevant local applicant is aggrieved by any of the
policies that address a variety of conditions of an approval, there is
other planning matters, such as the a right of review of the decision by
appearance of buildings, parking the State Administrative Tribunal,
requirements and the provision in accordance with the relevant
4