Home Business Local Planning Policy
Responsible directorate: Planning and Community Development
Objective: To provide criteria and standards for home businesses to operate without compromising
the residential character of an area, or adversely affecting the amenity of adjoining and
nearby residential properties.
1. Authority:
This Policy has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2 of the deemed provisions
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 which allows the
local government to prepare local planning policies relating to planning and development within
the Scheme area.
2. Application:
This Policy applies to the whole of the City of Joondalup.
The land uses of Home Office and Home Occupation do not require development approval in
accordance with the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015.
3. Definitions:
“amenity” means all those factors which combine to form the character of the area to residents
and passers-by and shall include the present and likely future amenity.
“home business” as defined by Local Planning Scheme No 3, means a dwelling or land around
a dwelling used by an occupier of the dwelling to carry out a business, service or profession if
the carrying out of the business, service or profession:
a. does not involve employing more than 2 people who are not members of the occupier’s
household; and
b. will not cause injury to or adversely affect the amenity of the neighbourhood; and
c. does not occupy an area greater than 50 square metres; and
Home Business 1

d. does not involve the retail sale, display or hire of any goods unless the sale, display or hire
is done only by means of the internet; and
e. does not result in traffic difficulties as a result of the inadequacy of parking or an increase
in traffic volumes in the neighbourhood; and
f. does not involve the presence, use or calling of a vehicle of more than 4.5 tonnes tare
weight; and
g. does not involve the use of an essential service that is greater than the use normally
required in the zone in which the dwelling is located.
“home occupation” as defined by Local Planning Scheme No 3, means a dwelling or land
around a dwelling used by an occupier of the dwelling to carry out an occupation if the carrying
out of the occupations that:
a. does not involve employing a person who is not a member of the occupier’s household;
and
b. will not cause injury to or adversely affect the amenity of the neighbourhood; and
c. does not occupy and area greater than 20 square metres; and
d. does not involve the display on the premises of a sign with an area exceeding 0.2 square
metres; and
e. does not involve the retail sale, display or hire of any goods unless the sale, display or hire
is done only by means of the internet; and
f. does not:
i. require a greater number of parking spaces than normally required for a single
dwelling; or
ii. result in an increase in traffic volume in the neighbourhood; and
g. does not involve the presence, use or calling of a vehicle of more than 4.5 tonnes tare
weight; and
h. does not include provisions for the fuelling, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles; and
i. does not involve the use of an essential service that is greater than the use normally
required in the zone in which the dwelling is located.
“home office” as defined by Local Planning Scheme No 3, means a dwelling used by an
occupier of the dwelling to carry out a home occupation if the carrying out of the occupation:
a. is solely within the dwelling; and
b. does not entail clients or customers travelling to and from the dwelling; and
c. does not involve the display of a sign on the premises; and
d. does not require any change to the external appearance of the dwelling.
“R-Codes” means State Planning Policy 7.3 Residential Design Codes Volumes 1 and 2.
Home Business 2

4. Statement:
The City of Joondalup recognises that working from home is an expanding area of employment.
The City, in addition, recognises that the amenity of residential areas should be protected by
minimising potential impacts to maintain residential areas as primarily a place to live, not
primarily a place to work.
To protect the amenity and character of residential areas, impacts associated with Home
Businesses such as noise, traffic, parking, pollution, people and advertising signs should be
minimised.
5. Details:
In assessing an application for development approval for a Home Business, the following will be
considered:
5.1. Criteria applying to home businesses:
a. The applicant must use the dwelling as the principal place of residence.
b. The Home Business must not result in a substantial and/or inappropriate
modification to the dwelling.
c. Any appliances or machinery used for the purpose of the Home Business must be of
a domestic scale. Large industrial appliances are prohibited.
d. Applicants must demonstrate that the proposal will not have an undue impact on
amenity of the surrounding area and land uses.
5.2. Car parking and customers:
a. One on-site car parking bay is required per customer and per employee. The total
number of on-site car parking bays shall be equal to the maximum number of
employees and customers that are permissible at the Home Business at any one
time. On-site car parking is to be designed and provided in accordance with the R-
Codes.
b. All car parking bays associated with the Home Business are to be made available
and maintained for the parking of customer and employee vehicles only, during the
approved home business operating hours. Resident parking is not permitted in
customer bays during the approved Home Business operating hours. No verge
parking for the business is permissible.
c. The Home Business must not require the provision of car parking bays in a manner
that would detract from the residential appearance of the dwelling or dominate the
streetscape.
5.3. Operating hours:
a. The days and hours of operation shall be limited to the following:
i. 8.00 am to 6.00 pm, Monday to Friday
ii. 9.00 am to 5.00 pm, Saturday.
Home Business 3

b. When determining an application, the number of hours and/or days of operation may
be increased, or further restricted through conditions of development approval where
it is deemed necessary to protect the amenity of the surrounding area.
5.4. Signage:
a. One advertising sign, not exceeding 0.2 square metres in area, is permitted on the
front façade of the dwelling for a Home Business in accordance with the City’s
Advertisements Local Planning Policy.
5.5. Additional criteria applying to a home business with two external employees:
5.5.1. Location:
Where this type of Home Business is proposed in the ‘Residential’ zone, the location of the
proposal shall be where it abuts or is directly opposite one of the commercial centres listed
in the City of Joondalup Local Planning Strategy, unless the applicant can demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the City that the proposal will not have an undue impact on the amenity
of the surrounding area as a result of noise, traffic, parking, pollution, people and
advertising.
5.5.2. Management Plan:
A Management Plan is required to be submitted as part of an application for this type of
Home Business. As a minimum, the Management Plan is to include the following
information:
a. A car parking plan.
b. Measures to minimise and control noise.
c. Measures to minimise vehicle loading and unloading and traffic movements.
d. The proposed hours of operation.
e. Details of any poisonous, flammable or harmful chemicals or other hazardous
materials proposed to be stored or used and measures to ensure that no polluting or
harmful substances will escape from the site.
f. Measures to minimise emissions of odours, dust or vapours from the site.
g. Ways to limit the number of people visiting the house at any one time in relation to
the business.
h. A plan showing any proposed outdoor storage areas.
i. Measures to ensure that no detrimental impact occurs to the character of the
neighbourhood.
j. Measures to manage the impact of the Home Business on any building or place
listed on the municipal inventory of heritage places.
k. Details of all appliances or machinery to be used in the Home Business.
Home Business 4

5.6. Community consultation:
Refer to the City’s Planning Consultation Local Planning Policy.
5.7. Approval period:
Where an applicant is not able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that a Home
Business will be able to operate without detriment to adjoining or nearby landowners, the
City may elect to grant a time limited approval. Following the initial approval period, should
it be demonstrated that the home business can operate without detrimentally impacting on
adjoining or nearby landowners, a permanent approval may be granted.
Creation date: September 1999 (CJ297-09/99)
Formerly: Home-based Business Local Planning Policy
Home Business Policy
Amendments: CJ297-09/99, CJ020-02/02, CJ238-11/05, CJ145-08/15, CJ108-06/17,
CJ184-10/18, CJ033-03/20, CJ079-05/22
Last reviewed: May 2022 (CJ079-05/22)
Related documentation: • City of Joondalup Local Planning Scheme No. 3
• City of Joondalup Local Planning Strategy
• Home-Based Business Fact Sheet
• State Planning Policy 7.3 Residential Design Codes Volume 1
and Volume 2
• Planning Consultation Local Planning Policy
File reference: 13048
Home Business 5