Department of Planning,
Lands and Heritage
Position
Statement:
Renewable energy facilities
March 2020
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the Department © State of Western Australia website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, Published by the
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result Perth WA 6000 This document is available in alternative
of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect formats on application to the
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred Locked Bag 2506 Communications Branch.
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before Perth WA 6001
applying the information contained in this document to Published March 2020
particular circumstances.

Position Statement:
1
Renewable energy facilities
March 2020
1. Policy intent 2. Renewable energy 3. Application of
facilities in Western this policy
This document outlines the Western
Australia
Australian Planning Commission (WAPC)
This position statement applies to
requirements to support the consistent
the preparation and assessment of
The Western Australian Planning
consideration and provision of renewable
planning instruments including region
Commission’s State Planning Strategy 2050
energy facilities within Western Australia.
and local planning schemes, planning
promotes renewable energy initiatives.
It supersedes Planning Bulletin 67 Guidelines
strategies, and structure plans; as well
for Wind Farm Development (2004).
The local planning framework, principally as in the assessment of subdivision and
administered by local government, can development applications in Western
The policy identifies assessment measures
effectively manage the development Australia.
to facilitate appropriate development of
assessment of renewable energy facilities.
renewable energy facilities. It seeks to
ensure these facilities are in areas that
Renewable energy facilities in Western
minimise potential impact upon the
Australia are principally wind turbine and
environment, natural landscape and urban
solar array systems. Other systems include
areas while maximising energy production
geothermal, biogas, ocean power and
returns and operational efficiency.
hydro-electric power for on-grid and off-
grid locations.
When reviewed and where relevant,
the WAPC will support amendments to
Renewable energy can enhance local
incorporate the statutory content from
economies and easily connect into the
this Position Statement into the Planning
network grid. The contribution that
and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
renewable energy facilities make to
Regulations 2015 as model or deemed
the reduction in carbon emissions is an
provisions.
important consideration for the growth of
the industry, as well as the socio-economic
benefits to the State.

Position Statement:
2
Renewable energy facilities
March 2020
4. Policy objectives 5. Policy measures analysis, including view shed mapping, It is recommended that a renewable
may be undertaken to enable important energy facility be designated in the zoning
The objectives of this position statement 5.1 State Planning Framework views and landscape character to be table of a local planning scheme as an
are to: identified and protected. ‘A’ use (not permitted without discretion
Regional and sub-regional strategies, and giving notice) of land within the
• guide the establishment of renewable
Competing land uses on rural land
as provided for by State Planning appropriate zones. ‘A’ land uses require
energy facilities to support the State
should be taken into consideration when
Policy 1 State Planning Framework, may public advertising before the proposal can
Energy Transformation Strategy
determining appropriate locations for
provide objectives related to renewable be determined.
(March 2019)
renewable energy facilities. The provisions
energy, general principles for location
• outline key planning and of State Planning Policy 2.5 Rural Planning Special Control Areas may be applied
in the regions and general guidance for
environmental considerations for need to be considered when assessing within local planning schemes to
renewable energy facilities in the local
the location, siting and design of appropriate locations for these facilities. create special provisions, for example
planning framework.
renewable energy facilities Large facilities should be located close to to protect air flight paths, regionally or
• promote the consistent consideration the network grid and preferably on cleared locally significant key views, or valued
5.2 Local planning framework
and assessment of renewable energy rural land with low agricultural value. landscapes from incompatible land use
facilities or development. A renewable energy
Local governments should address Where practicable, the agricultural use of
facility may be specified as an ‘X’ use (not
• facilitate appropriate development
renewable energy facilities in their local land should continue after installation of
permitted) in these areas.
of renewable energy facilities while
planning framework. a renewable energy facility. The future
minimising any potential impact upon
growth of regional towns and urban Local planning schemes should include
the environment, natural landscape,
5.2.1 Local planning strategy growth areas should not be compromised provisions to provide direction on matters
and urban areas
by renewable energy facilities impacting such as the location, permissibility, terms of
• encourage informed public The local planning strategy should indicate upon locations that will accommodate operation and development standards of
engagement early in the renewable landscape protection areas that should future sensitive land uses such as a renewable energy facility. Measures may
energy facility planning process. exclude renewable energy facilities. residential dwellings, particularly on the address potential impacts such as setbacks
Where a local government does not urban-rural fringe. and vegetation screening from sensitive
have an approved strategy, the subject land uses.
site may require detailed evaluation as 5.2.2 Local planning scheme
Where the local government has not
to the landscape qualities as part of the
adopted a local planning strategy, or the
overall planning assessment. On and Where applicable, local planning schemes
local planning scheme does not include
off the grid renewable energy facility should contain the land use definition of
provisions to guide decision making on
considerations may be included in a local renewable energy facility as per section 6
renewable energy facilities, consideration
planning strategy. For example, areas of below, in lieu of the existing definition for a
of the above issues may be incorporated
high environmental and landscape value wind farm.
into a local planning policy.
may be unsuitable for large scale wind or
solar farm development. Visual landscape

Position Statement:
3
Renewable energy facilities
March 2020
5.2.3 Local planning policy • Department of Defence (Australian Facilities should be located near the grid The EPA Environmental Factor Guideline -
Government) to minimise clearing of vegetation for grid Flora and vegetation (December 2016) and
A local planning policy can be used to • Department of Fire and Emergency connection power lines. Solar arrays over a EPA Environmental Factor Guideline - Social
provide specific development standards Services large area may have a significant effect on Surroundings (December 2016) should
applicable to renewable energy facilities, the clearing of native vegetation. Already be used to inform the environmental
• Department of Jobs, Tourism, Science
and any other matters required to guide cleared farming land may offer a practical assessment.
and Innovation
the local government in its decision solution to minimise any environmental
making on a renewable energy facility. • Department of Mines, Industry impact. The EPA will determine whether the
Regulation and Safety proposal should be subject to an
5.3 Renewable energy facility • Department of Planning, Lands and To understand the impact of wind turbines environmental impact assessment (see EPA
proposals Heritage on birds and bats, the following matters Guidance Statement No.33 Environmental
should be considered: Guidance for Planning and Development
• Department of Primary Industries and
5.3.1 Community consultation Regional Development • stopover sites, local bird species (May 2008) for further information).
roosting and nesting sites
• Department of Water and Referral to the Commonwealth Minister for
Early consultation with the community Environmental Regulation • location of bat colonies the Environment through the Department
and stakeholders by the proponents is
• Electricity network provider • areas of high raptor activity of Agriculture, Water and Environment,
encouraged to ensure that the proposal is
compatible with existing land uses on and • Energy Policy WA • the cumulative impact of wind turbines under the Environment Protection and
on migration routes. Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999, may
near the site. • Environmental Protection Authority
also be required for matters of national
• Local government The positioning of wind turbines outside environmental significance.
The local government should be
consulted with respect to the community • Main Roads Western Australia of migratory routes may reduce the risk
of avian strikes. An avian study should be
consultation program. • National Farmers Federation 5.3.3 Visual and landscape impact
undertaken when this risk is identified.
• Western Australian Planning
Relevant stakeholders may include: The location and siting of a renewable
Commission Proposals that may have a detrimental
• Air Services Australia impact upon the environment should be energy facility may require a visual and
landscape impact assessment that
• Australian Wind Alliance 5.3.2 Environmental impact referred to the Department of Water and
addresses:
• Civil Aviation Safety Authority Environmental Regulation (DWER) and the
An environmental survey of the site should Environmental Protection Authority (EPA). • landscape significance and sensitivity
• Clean Energy Council
to change, site earthworks, topography,
be conducted prior to the commencement The proposal could be referred by the
• Department of Biodiversity, extent of cut and fill, the extent and
of the renewable energy facility design. decision-making authority, the proponent,
Conservation and Attractions type of vegetation, clearing and
The type, location and significance of flora or any individual.
• Department of Agriculture, Water and and fauna, particularly rare endangered rehabilitation areas, land use patterns,
Environment (Australian Government) or threatened communities that may built form character, public amenity
and community values
• Department of Industry, Science, be impacted, should be described and
Energy and Resources (Australian mapped so that remnant native vegetation
Government) and sensitive areas can be avoided.

Position Statement:
4
Renewable energy facilities
March 2020
• likely impact on views including the The minimum distance may be reduced and any public building, road or pathway 5.3.6 Heritage
visibility of the facility using view shed with the approval of the local government, including visitor facilities such as car parks,
analysis and simulations of views from based upon advice from DWER. platforms, information facilities and toilets. Some locations may hold Aboriginal
significant viewing locations including heritage, natural or historic heritage
residential areas, major scenic drives Proposals for new wind turbines within Wind turbines proposed in areas subject significance which may impact site
and lookouts 1,500 metres of an existing or new noise- to cyclones need to be designed and suitability. An assessment should address:
sensitive premises (excluding caretaker constructed to enable safe stowage if high
• layout of the facility including the • local archaeological and
dwellings) will require an acoustic study to winds are forecast.
number, height, scale, spacing, colour, ethnographical records
enable the local government to determine
surface reflectivity and design of Proponents of wind turbine proposals • any impact upon the natural
the acceptability of a lesser separation
components, including any ancillary should refer to the National Airports environment that have aesthetic,
distance. The acoustic study should
buildings, signage, access roads, and Safeguarding Framework (NASF) Guideline historical, scientific or social
be completed by a qualified acoustic
incidental facilities D: Managing the Risk to Aviation Safety of significance or other special value for
consultant and include the provision
• measures proposed to minimise of suitable noise attenuation measures, Wind Turbine Installation (Wind Farms) / the present and future community
unwanted, unacceptable or adverse where required. Noise emissions from Wind Monitoring Towers to determine any • any impact upon the historic heritage
visual impacts. renewable energy facilities, including potential aviation safety risks and possible characteristics of adjoining/nearby
wind turbines, are required to meet mitigation measures. Any potential places with an impact assessment
Visual Landscape Planning in WA: a manual the standards prescribed under the aviation safety risks identified require of the proposal undertaken where
for evaluation, assessment, siting and design, Environmental Protection (Noise) consultation with Civil Aviation Safety relevant.
(November 2007) and the Australian Wind Authority (CASA), Air Services Australia
Regulations 1997. The South Australian
Energy Association and the Australian and/or the Commonwealth Department of Consultation with the Department of
Environmental Protection Authority – Wind
Council of National Trusts Publication Defence. Planning, Lands and Heritage may be
Farms Environmental Noise Guidelines (2009)
Wind Farms and Landscape Values (2005) required if heritage issues are identified.
should also be referenced for assessment
provide detailed guidance on visual Wind turbines and solar arrays in bushfire Appropriate consultation should be
purposes. These guidelines acknowledge
landscape impact assessments. prone areas should be designed and undertaken with respect to Aboriginal
the potential for operation in the presence
maintained so they are not a bushfire heritage matters.
of higher wind-induced background noise
risk to surrounding bushland, and where
5.3.4 Noise impact
levels.
possible should not be in bushfire prone
(wind turbine proposals) 5.3.7 Construction impact
areas with an ‘extreme’ bushfire hazard
The minimum recommended distance 5.3.5 Public and aviation safety level or bushfire attack level (BAL) - 40 or It is important to accommodate the full
between noise-sensitive land uses and BAL- Flame Zone. A minimum 10 metres scope of works to occur on the site in
Appropriate measures should be provided,
a wind turbine is 1,500 metres*. clearance to combustible vegetation in the development of a renewable energy
in consultation with the local government,
the form of an Asset Protection Zone facility. Consideration needs be given to
to manage public access near a renewable
(APZ) is recommended. The APZ should potential staging that may occur including
energy facility (particularly wind turbines)
* Evidence suggests that there are unlikely to be any be managed in a low threat state, in one type of renewable energy being
significant effects on physical or mental health for accordance with the Guidelines for Planning
noise-sensitive land uses at distances greater than
1,500m from wind turbines Source: National Health in Bushfire Prone Areas (DPLH/DFES: 2017).
and Medical Research Council (February 2015 ref #
EH57)

Position Statement:
5
Renewable energy facilities
March 2020
subsequently complemented by a second 6. Definitions
type of renewable energy to supplement
continuity of feed into the grid, for Caretaker dwelling has the same
example, wind turbines supplemented by meaning as under the Planning and
solar arrays on the same site. Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015.
Key matters that should be addressed
during the construction phase are: Renewable energy facility means
• a site construction management premises used to generate energy from
plan that identifies standards and a renewable energy source and includes
procedures for the construction any building or other structure used in, or
of the development including the relating to, the generation of energy by a
management of environmental renewable resource. It does not include
emissions such as dust and noise renewable energy electricity generation
where the energy produced principally
• site disturbance should be minimised
supplies a domestic and/or business
during construction through careful
premises and any on selling to the grid is
siting and measures to address
secondary.
erosion, drainage run-off, flooding,
water quality, retention of remnant
Sensitive land uses comprise land uses
vegetation, stabilisation of top soil, and
that are residential or institutional in
weed and disease hygiene
nature, where people live or regularly
• vehicle and machinery access and spend extended periods of time.
movement. These include dwellings, short-stay
accommodation, schools, hospitals and
A decommissioning program should
child care centres and generally exclude
be separately developed in relation
commercial or industrial premises.
to removal of the facility and any
rehabilitation requirements.