Construction Management Plans
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP1.22
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 15 November 2022
Introduction
The City of Melville is evolving and significant development has been experienced in a number of
the City’s key Activity Centres and along key transport routes. Such development is anticipated to
continue in response to the City’s Local Planning Framework including the Local Planning Strategy,
the Local Planning Scheme, and Activity Centre Plans.
In response to the pressure brought about by such developments, the City has, for a number of
years, applied a condition on development approvals requiring a Construction Management Plan
(CMP) to be submitted before building works take place to ensure the adverse amenity impact of
construction work is managed and where possible minimised.
This local planning policy (LPP) and the associated Construction and Demolition Management Plan
Pro-Forma provides clear guidance to applicants regarding the information to be submitted in a CMP.
The intent of the LPP is to minimise the impact of construction on the riverine environment, the
assets of adjoining landowners and tenants, the surrounding road network and to help to protect the
City’s assets.
Definitions
Adjoining land means land which shares a physical boundary with the lot(s) of a proposed
development site.
Road Reserve means land between the front boundaries of private allotments.
Policy Objectives
The objectives of this policy are:
• To ensure that construction and demolition works are undertaken in a way which has minimal
impact on resident amenity and on the surrounding community.
• To ensure construction activities do not have a negative impact on the abutting Swan or
Canning River system or any associated surface water features, wetlands or associated
vegetation.
• To provide clear guidance to the development industry with regard to the City’s expectations.
• To ensure that surrounding landowners are aware of the key aspects of the construction
staging and progress, and to ensure customer complaints are received and actioned.
• To maintain and protect the City’s assets.
• To maintain safe and convenient pedestrian, cyclist and vehicle movement.
• To streamline the construction management process.
• To outline the compliance procedures the City will follow in order to ensure the commitments
made in the CMP are followed.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 20/12/2022 2:38 PM Page 1 of 9
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Policy Scope
A condition of development approval requiring the submission of a (CMP) prior to the
commencement of development will be applied to the following development approvals:
• All major developments as defined in Local Planning Policy 1.1 Planning Process and
Decision Making as development comprising more than 10 dwellings or more than 2,000m2
of non-residential floor space.
• Any other development which due to its size, location or any other factor is considered by the
City to require a CMP.
The provision of a CMP is required in addition to any other applicable requirements under Local
Planning Scheme No. 6, the Planning and Development Act 2005, and any other statutory provisions
at the local, state and federal government levels.
Policy Statement
The CMP template which is provided in support of this document* outlines the specific detail to be
provided in a CMP for the approval of the City. The information in the clauses below is designed to
provide guidance to applicants regarding key requirements of the CMP.
*Form available on the City’s website.
1. Site Plan
Where applicable, the City will require appropriately scaled 1:100 or 1:200 site plans, to be
provided together with the CMP application, annotated to identify the location of City assets and
any proposed temporary facilities including:
• street trees, signage, kerbing, drainage, streetlights and power poles.
• Delivery and storage of materials including the location of a materials hoist.
• Site office and storage sheds.
• Any temporary perimeter/security fencing.
• The location of waste disposal bins and sanitary facilities.
• Identification of construction work zones, if any.
• The location of any scaffolding hoardings or gantries.
• The location of crossovers or other access points; and
• The location of wash down areas for trucks.
2. Stakeholder engagement and complaints management.
Construction activity may result in adverse amenity impacts, particularly for owners and occupiers of
adjoining property. Whilst it is acknowledged that such amenity impacts are temporary in nature, a
CMP can assist in minimising any adverse impacts. In addition a CMP can ensure that stakeholders
are kept informed of the construction progress, the measures which are put in place to manage and
mitigate the impacts, and it can provide information regarding a feedback/complaint process to
enable the effective raising of 3rd party concerns.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 20/12/2022 2:38 PM Page 2 of 9
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

The City will assess proposed CMPs taking into account the possible cumulative effects of other
large, potentially overlapping, constructions projects in the vicinity of the subject site in order to
ensure that adequate measures are put in place in the CMP to manage and mitigate the adverse
amenity impacts to the community, especially for owners and tenants of adjoining property.
a) Stakeholder engagement and information plan (for major development)
A Stakeholder Information and Engagement Plan shall be prepared and submitted to the City with
the CMP detailing how the local community and businesses will be kept informed about the
development throughout the construction process. If a CMP is required to be updated to reflect a
change in circumstances this should also be conveyed to stakeholders. In preparing the stakeholder
engagement plan, the applicant shall liaise with all residents, landowners and businesses which
directly abut the construction site as well as those directly opposite and provide evidence that this
has occurred. Where a proposed development has the potential to impact on a wider area, through
road closures or diversions, or where the development is located in proximity to the river system the
stakeholder management plan shall respond accordingly.
The stakeholder management plan should take into account the likely impacts on:
• Safety.
• Amenity.
• Environmental impacts; and
• Vehicular activity including the cumulative impacts that arise from the advent of multiple
development activity.
b) Complaints management.
It is expected that issues relating to construction including noise, dust, deliveries, and the behaviour
of staff and or contractors should be dealt with onsite in the first instance. Signage specifying the
contact details of the site supervisor shall be installed on site and a complaints management plan
shall be submitted as a part of the CMP.
The complaints management plan should describe the following:
• To whom to submit a complaint including contact details
• When complaints will be responded to.
• How complaints and associated responses will be recorded in a register.
• An escalation process; and
• An emergency contact.
A copy of the complaints register shall be made available to the City on request.
3. Managing footpaths, verges, roads and City infrastructure.
The applicant is responsible for the protection of City assets during the construction period and for
ensuring that the verge and City assets are reinstated to the previous condition to the City’s
satisfaction once the construction period is complete. The construction management plan shall
outline how this will be achieved.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 20/12/2022 2:38 PM Page 3 of 9
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

a) Dilapidation Report
The City requires a Dilapidation Report prepared on behalf of the developer by a specialist person(s)
to be submitted detailing:
• The current condition of all City infrastructure adjacent to the worksite. A copy of this report
shall be provided to the City as a part of the CMP.
• The current condition of adjacent land and/or buildings prior to the commencement of
construction. These properties should be identified on a map or in writing. After the report
has been agreed in writing by the associated property owners a copy of this report(s) shall
be provided to the associated property owners and written confirmation of this shall be
provided to the City
b) Tree protection
Where street trees are required to be protected during the construction phase, a condition of
development approval will be applied.
The CMP shall demonstrate how the builder will comply with this condition showing the location of
the tree protection zone and methods being employed to ensure the construction and demolition
works will not result in any damage to the existing trees. The CMP shall also demonstrate how the
tree will be cared for during the construction phase, including mulching and watering, and the trees
health will be monitored by the builder.
c) Road and footpath obstructions
The construction process should minimise interruption and inconvenience to pedestrians and
motorists particularly where this is occurring within activity centres or along key transport routes. In
the interests of public safety, where deemed necessary, the City may require the use of gantries or
other methods to maintain clear pedestrian access at all times.
A traffic and pedestrian management plan shall be prepared by a suitably qualified consultant to
demonstrate how these matters will be addressed.
d) Parking provisions for worksite personnel.
The CMP must demonstrate how adequate parking for worksite personnel is achieved. The City’s
preference is for all worksite personnel to park off the street either on private property or within off
street public parking bays managed by the City or privately.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 20/12/2022 2:38 PM Page 4 of 9
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

A transport plan shall be provided detailing the following:
• The number of personnel expected on site at each stage of the development:
• Arrangements which have been made to secure parking off site on a private property, its
location and distance to the site (if applicable).
• Where there are no off-site or off-public street parking arrangements proposed, the City may
require that the developer to pay the City to provide their construction workforce with access
to an appropriate number of parking bays in City public carparks (as determined to be
appropriate by the City).
• A suitably scaled map showing:
The location of publicly available off-site parking facilities in the locality and the
o
distance to the site.
Details of any on street parking, including the distance to the site and any time
o
restriction.
Location where parking is not permitted.
o
Location of train station, bus stops, cycle paths or any other active transport options
o
in the near vicinity.
• Measures to be employed to encourage personnel to use active transport options, including
the provision of storage on site, financial incentives, and the like.
A copy of the transport plan shall be provided to all personnel as a part of the induction process.
e) Management of deliveries.
The CMP should outline how deliveries to and from the site will be managed including the following:
• The times when deliveries will occur.
• The length of time loading and unloading will take to ensure adequate time between vehicles
to prevent ramping.
• The key roads to be used; and
• Any road closures which will be required to facilitate the loading and unloading of vehicles.
The actual closure of road(s) and the associated diversion of traffic shall be the subject of notification
to the City a minimum of 14 days prior to intended closure. This will enable consideration of the
cumulative impacts of road closures and diversions given multiple developments may be under
construction within a particular area at the same time.
A work zone may be established during the construction phase to allow for an area of the road
reserve to be used exclusively by the builder for deliveries and loading and unloading of vehicles.
The Traffic Management Plan provided in support of the proposal needs to address this matter in
detail.
f) Structures within the road reserve.
The City may agree to some structures associated with the construction process being
located within the road reserve, such as gantries, signage, site offices, amenities and storage
areas. A separate application to deposit building materials on a verge or excavate near a
street will need to be made to the City along with all relevant information including detailed
drawings, relevant certifications and a fee.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 20/12/2022 2:38 PM Page 5 of 9
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

The City may also agree to other works within the verge such as temporary crossovers, the
use of ground anchors or other stabilising methods. Where these are proposed the CMP
shall provide relevant details such as.
• the location of any services below the road reserve.
• consent from the relevant service authorities.
• structural certification.
• detail of how these will be decommissioned or disposed of when no longer in use,
and.
• A suitable legal agreement being in place with the City.
For clarity, verges in front of properties other than the subject development site may only be used
for these purposes with the prior written consent of the adjoining landowner or tenant, or the Council,
if the Council is the owner or manager of the subject land.
4. Environmental management
The Environmental Plan (EP) shall be submitted as a part of the CMP and shall address all activities
that could cause noise, light spill, vibration, dust, sand and other disturbances to nearby businesses,
noise sensitive premises including residential uses, schools, childcare premise and the general
public. The EP is to also consider potential impacts to the Swan and Canning River system and
address and prevent where required the movement of soil and sediment from the worksite to the
stormwater network, the impact of any required dewatering, acid sulphate soils and hazardous
materials.
The EP shall detail how any required remediation and clean-up work will be undertaken.
In relation to dewatering, applicants should have regard to the provisions of the Department of
Biodiversity, Conservation and Attraction’s Policy Statement No. 50 – Planning for Dewatering
affecting the Swan Canning Development Control Area.
a) Work hours
It is noted that standard work hours are between 7am and 7pm Monday to Saturday. Work outside
of these hours may require separate approval. A request shall be submitted at least 14 days before
the work occurring and must be accompanied by a suitable noise management plan.
b) Control of sand and dust
Details of the measures to be put in place to control the drift of sand and dust from the site, and
remediate, if necessary, are required. This includes the associated remediation measures, which
shall be provided as part of the CMP.
c) Lighting
Details shall be included within the CMP of any external lighting proposed on site and the measures
proposed to minimise associated adverse impacts.
d) Vehicle wash downs
A vehicle wash down area must be nominated and details shall be provided of the measures to be
employed to ensure washdown material does not enter the road reserve, impact trees or the
stormwater system.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 20/12/2022 2:38 PM Page 6 of 9
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

e) Control of vibration
Details of the equipment used during the construction phase and measures being employed to
control vibration and reduce the impact on the surrounding landowners and road reserve are to be
provided.
f) Stormwater management
All stormwater shall be contained on site during the construction program. The City does not support
the diversion of stormwater into the City’s drainage network. If the site requires stormwater
management during construction a Stormwater Management Plan shall be provided with the CMP.
g) Dewatering
If dewatering of the site is required details of the proposed methodology, including machinery to be
used operating times, odour and light control shall be provided to the City as part of the CMP.
If the dewatering requires approval from separate bodies such as the Department of Water and
Environment Regulation, the Department of Biodiversity, Conservation and Attractions or any other
body, confirmation of such shall be provided along with the CMP.
h) Waste Management and material recovery
The CMP should demonstrate the methods to be employed to minimise construction and demolition
waste. The state target is a minimum of 75% material recovery.
i) Hazardous Material management
If the demolition or site works require the removal of hazardous materials, the CMP shall include a
Hazardous Materials Management Plan prepared by a suitably qualified consultant.
5. Site storage and amenities
Where these are proposed to be located on private property away from the construction site,
details are to be provided to the City, including:
• Written consent from the landowner.
• A description of the activities and structures required.
• Any relevant drawings.
• The length of time these structures will be on site.
Development approval may be required for these works.
6. Cranes.
The location of proposed cranes shall be provided in the CMP. If the crane is proposed to use the
airspace above adjoining properties or the road reserve this should be shown on the plans provided
in support of the CMP. This will ensure awareness on the part of 3rd party property owners.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 20/12/2022 2:38 PM Page 7 of 9
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

7. Staging of works
If construction is proposed in stages, this should be detailed in the CMP. It may be necessary that a
separate CMP is provided for each stage or updated to reflect the activity and associated impacts of
the specific construction stage. The need for this will depend on the complexity of the site, the scale
of the development, and the associated impacts on the adjoining landowners.
8. Compliance
Once the CMP, along with all relevant supporting information, is approved, this will become a public
document and may be made available to the public on request. For larger developments which have
the potential to generate impacts of interest to a broader audience, the approved CMP and
supporting documents may be made available on the City’s website.
A CMP may be prepared by an owner, developer or the builder. The responsibility for complying with
the CMP on a day-to-day basis generally rests with the builder and associated personnel however
failure to comply with an approved CMP may result in compliance action against the owner having
regard to the relevant provisions of the Planning and Development Act 2005.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 20/12/2022 2:38 PM Page 8 of 9
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning
Schemes) Regulations 2015
Delegated Authority DA – 020: Planning
and Related Matters
Department of Biodiversity, Conservation
and Attractions Policy Statement No. 50 –
Planning for Dewatering Affecting the Swan
Canning Development Control Area.
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Framework, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No. 6
Delegated Authority DA-020
______________________________________________________________________________
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Ordinary Meeting of Council 18 October 2022 UP22/4003
REVIEWS:
Ordinary Meeting of Council 15 November 2022 UP22/4003
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 20/12/2022 2:38 PM Page 9 of 9
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.