Local Planning
Policy 3.8
Local Planning Area 8 -
O’Connor
fremantle.wa.gov.au

Local Planning Policy 3.8 - O’Connor
Statutory background
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (the Regulations). This policy may be cited as
Local Planning Policy 3.8 – O’Connor (LPP 3.8).
Objectives
• To retain the O’Connor Industrial area as a strategic industrial area for Fremantle
and the South-West metropolitan region and to ensure that development
contributes to high standard of amenity and design as well as compatibility with
adjacent residential uses.
• To provide for the development of commercial uses along major roads and to
restrict the encroachment of such uses into residential and industrial areas.
• To prevent increased conflict between new built form and future planned widening
of Stock Road.
• To protect the amenity of existing residential areas via the Buffer Area, with
protection of amenity from adjoining industrial uses.
• To ensure safe access and movement for pedestrians and cyclists.
• To prevent, as far as practicable, the intrusion of commercial and industrial traffic
into residential streets.
• To enhance the streetscape and reduce the urban heat island effect through the
provision and maintenance of vegetation and trees.
Application of this Policy
This policy applies to development on land zoned Industrial, Commercial or
Neighbourhood Centre within Local Planning Area 8 – O’Connor, as identified within Local
Planning Scheme No. 4 (LPS4), including the O’Connor Industrial Interface Area (Buffer
Area).
Where development includes a residential component assessed under Part B of the
Residential Design Codes (R-Codes), only the maximum height and street setbacks of
clause 2.3 of this policy apply to the residential component.
Where development includes a residential component assessed under Part C of the R-
Codes, only the street setbacks of clause 2.4 of this policy apply to the residential
component. All other residential criteria are assessed under LPS4, Local Planning Policy
2.9: Residential Streetscape Policy or other relevant local planning policy, and/or the
Residential Design Codes as applicable.
1/7

Developments and other planning proposals seeking to vary the policy criteria are to
demonstrate compliance with the objective and design principes of this Policy, LPS4, and
(where relevant) the design principles of the R-Codes. This policy is to be read in
conjunction with Schedule 7 – Local Planning Areas (Development Requirements) of LPS4.
Where this policy is inconsistent with the Scheme or an adopted structure plan or local
development plan, that instrument shall prevail to the extent of any inconsistency. Where
this policy is inconsistent with a more general local planning policy, this policy shall prevail
to the extent of any inconsistency.
Policy Provisions
Design Element Policy Provision
1. Landscaping
1.1 Minimum landscaping area 10% of total lot area.
May be reduced to 7% where a Regulated Tree is
retained (refer to the City’s Local Planning Policy 2.26
- Tree Retention)
1.2 Landscaping location Predominantly within the street setback area(s) but
outside of Primary Regional Roads Reserves
1.3 Landscaping distribution Distributed in areas not less than 4m2
1.4 Shade trees in landscaping areas* 1 per 50m2 of minimum landscaping area
1.5 Shade trees in car parking areas* 1 per 4 car bays provided and co-located with car
bays to provide shade.
1.6 Minimum deep soil area width
Tree Indicative Nominal DSA Min.
per tree
Size canopy at height at per DSA
maturity maturity tree width
Small 2-6m 3-8m 9m2 2m
Med 6-9m 8-12m 36m2 3m
Large >9m >12m 64m2 6m
1.7 Design Landscaping should demonstrate waterwise planting
principles and tree species appropriate to the
environment.
*Shade trees in car parking areas are additional to shade trees in landscaping areas.
** Shade trees in car parking areas are to be dispersed and not consolidated in one area.
2/7

2. Vehicular Movement
2.1 Parking As per Table 2 of Local Planning Scheme No. 4
2.2 Crossover number Maximum 1 crossover per street frontage
a) Crossovers are to avoid removal of, or detrimental impact to,
2.3 Crossover location
street trees.
b) No new crossovers are permitted onto Stock Road without
approval from Main Roads Western Australia.
Vehicular movement design principles
In granting discretion to the above, the City shall have regard to whether:
• Vehicle ingress and egress minimises traffic impacts including intrusion of commercial
vehicles into adjoining residential streets;
• There is sufficient manoeuvrability available for larger vehicles particularly in respect to
smaller sites requiring regular deliveries;
• Development demonstrates a minimisation in the proliferation of crossovers; and
• Development results in enhanced streetscape amenity.
3. General Development Requirements in O’Connor
3.1 Maximum Zone Site cover
site cover
Industrial 65%
Commercial 75%
Neighbourhood Centre 80%
Buffer area As per zoning above
3.2 Maximum Zone Wall height
wall height
Industrial / Commercial N/A
Neighbourhood Centre 11m
Buffer area 2 storeys (7m)
3.3 Minimum primary Zone Primary street setback
street setback
Industrial / Commercial / Buffer 6m
Neighbourhood Centre Nil
3.4 Minimum other Zone Other street setback
street(s) setback
Industrial / Commercial / Buffer 3m
Neighbourhood Centre Nil
3.5 Minimum rear and Nil unless abutting an affected dwelling or Residential zoned land, in
side setbacks which case the setbacks are as per the Residential Design Codes.
3/7

Street and boundary setback design principles
In granting discretion to the minimum prescribed setbacks, the City shall consider:
• That the interface between industrial and residential land uses have sufficient
buffers to protect residential amenity and safety;
• That the proposal is consistent with predominant setback patterns of adjoining
properties and the locality generally;
• It can be demonstrated that reduction of the proposed setback is consistent with the
emerging character of the streetscape or is compensated for by additional
landscaping beyond the minimum; and
• Setbacks are sufficient to accommodate vehicular manoeuvrability, protect
pedestrian and cyclist movement, and support ecological green corridors.
a) Materials and finishes to complement the visual amenity of the
3.6 Building design
area, which can include clay or limestone brick, galvanised steel,
and minimal use of timber as posts to ensure consistency with
traditional character of O’Connor.
Concrete facades and rendered brick should feature articulation,
inclusive of windows and patterned scoring, and varying colour to
prevent large expanses of blank frontages.
b) Elevations facing the streetscape, carparks, and internal staff
areas or courtyard / recreational landscaped areas are to feature
windows to discourage crime and promote perception of passive
surveillance.
4/7

4. Buffer Area
4.1 As per clause 5.6 of LPS4, partly reproduced below for ease of reference, the buffer
area consists of the following land:
Figure 1: Buffer Areas of O’Connor
4.2 Buffer Area Land Use
The following uses are not permitted within the Buffer areas:
i) industry – general (licensed),
ii) service station,
iii) fuel depot,
iv) motor vehicle repair,
v) motor vehicle wrecking;
vi) industry (noxious); and
vii) transport depot.
Despite the provisions of Table 1, the following use is designated “A”—
(i) motor vehicles, boat or caravan sales.
5/7

Definition(s)
DSA (Deep Soil Area) means soft landscape area on lot with no impeding building
structure or feature above or below, which supports growth of small to large canopy trees
and meets a stated minimum dimension. Used primarily for landscaping and open to the
sky, deep soil areas exclude basement car parks, services, swimming pools, tennis courts
and impervious surfaces including car parks, driveways and roof areas
Primary street means, for development not subject to the Residential Design Codes, the
sole or principal public road that provides access to the major entry (front door) to the
building, unless otherwise designated by the local government.
Local Planning Policy – Document Control
Responsible Officer Policy Title Next Review Date
Manager City Planning Local Planning Policy 3.8 - Local (four years)
Planning Area 8 - O’Connor
Version Decision to Adopt/Amend Brief Details of Modifications
1 25 July 2007 Ordinary Council Meeting - PSC0707-201
2 9 October 2024 Ordinary Council Meeting - C2410-4
3 23 October 2024 Administrative changes made by Ordinary Council
Meeting – Inserted policy into City’s current template,
adding the ‘Statutory Background’ section, and
renumbered clauses accordingly, corrected various
typographical errors, and updated references as
follows:
• ‘Zoning Table 2 of LPS4’ to ‘Table 1 – Zoning of LPS4’
• ‘Vehicle Parking Table 3 of LPS4’ to ‘Table 2 – Vehicle
Parking’
• ‘Clause 5.3 of LPS4’ to ‘clause 4.3 of LPS4’; and
• ‘Application for Planning Approval’ to ‘Application for
Development Approval’.
4 12 November 2025 Review made by Ordinary Council Meeting expanding
site coverage, design and landscaping requirements,
introducing façade / elevation finish requirements, and
various administrative improvements to aid clarity
Public Consultation Yes
WAPC Approval Required? No Date approved by WAPC N/A
6/7

Responsibility and review information
Responsible officer: Manager City Planning
Document 25 July 2007 – Item PSC0707-201
adoption/approval
details
Document 9 October 2024 – Item C2410-4
amendment details 23 October 2024 (Administrative) – Inserted policy into City’s
current template, adding the ‘Statutory Background’ section,
and renumbered clauses accordingly, corrected various
typographical errors, and updated references as follows:
• ‘Zoning Table 2 of LPS4’ to ‘Table 1 – Zoning of LPS4’
• ‘Vehicle Parking Table 3 of LPS4’ to ‘Table 2 – Vehicle Parking
of LPS4’
• ‘Clause 5.3 of LPS4’ to ‘clause 4.3 of LPS4’; and
• ‘Application for Planning Approval’ to ‘Application for
Development Approval’.
• 12 November 2025 – Item C2511-3
Next review date 12 November 2029
(maximum of four years from last review)
7/7