THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL GAZETTED COPY, GAZETTED COPIES CAN BE
OBTAINED FROM STATE LAW PUBLISHER. GAZETTAL DATE: THURSDAY 9 JULY 2015
state
planning
policy
5.1
land use planning in the vicinity
of perth airport
July 2015
Prepared under Part Three of the
Planning and Development Act 2005 by the
Western Australian Planning Commission

State Planning Policy 5.1 II
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
Disclaimer
This document has been published by the
Department of Planning on behalf of the
Western Australian Planning Commission.
Any representation, statement, opinion or
advice expressed or implied in this publication
is made in good faith and on the basis that the
Government, its employees and agents are
not liable for any damage or loss whatsoever
which may occur as a result of action taken
or not taken, as the case may be, in respect
of any representation, statement, opinion or
advice referred to herein. Professional advice
should be obtained before applying the
information contained in this document to
particular circumstances.
© Western Australian Planning Commission
Published by the
Western Australian Planning Commission
Gordon Stephenson House
140 William Street
Perth WA 6000
Locked Bag 2506
Perth WA 6001
Published July 2015
website: www.planning.wa.gov.au
email: corporate@planning.wa.gov.au
tel: 08 6551 9000
fax: 08 6551 9001
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
infoline: 1800 626 477
This document is available in alternative
formats on application to Communication
Services.

State Planning Policy 5.1 III
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
1 CITATION 1
2 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 1
2.1 Importance of Perth Airport 1
2.2 Aircraft noise measurement 1
2.3 Australian Noise Exposure Forecast 1
2.4 Policy measures 1
3 APPLICATION OF THE POLICY 1
4 POLICY OBJECTIVES 1
5 POLICY MEASURES 2
5.1 Interpretation 2
5.2 Areas below 20 ANEF 2
5.3 Areas between 20 and 25 ANEF 2
5.3.1 Zoning 2
5.3.2 Residential density 2
5.3.3 Subdivision and strata
subdivision 3
5.3.4 Development 3
5.3.5 Noise insulation 3
5.3.6 Notification on title 3
5.3.7 Advice 3
5.4 Areas above 25 ANEF 4
5.4.1 Zoning 4
5.4.2 Residential density 4
5.4.3 Subdivision and strata
subdivision 4
5.4.4 Development 5
5.4.5 Noise insulation 5
5.4.6 Notification on title 6
5.4.7 Advice 6
6 IMPLEMENTATION 6
6.1 Zoning and density coding 6
6.2 Development control 6

State Planning Policy 5.1 IV
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
6.3 Subdivision control 7
6.4 Referral arrangements 7
6.5 Notification and advice 7
APPENDIX 1 – Building site acceptability 8
APPENDIX 2 – Indoor design sound levels 9
APPENDIX 3 – Notification about aircraft noise to
beplaced on property title 11
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 12
REFERENCES 13

State Planning Policy 5.1 1
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
1 CITATION 2.3 Australian Noise Exposure Forecast
This policy is predicated upon the ANEF prepared by
This is a State planning policy prepared under section
Perth Airport Pty Ltd in consultation with Airservices
26 of the Planning and Development Act 2005. It may
Australia, which is incorporated by reference into this
be cited as State Planning Policy 5.1: Land Use Planning
policy. A copy of the current ANEF can be found on
in the Vicinity of Perth Airport. For the purpose of this
the Perth Airport website and is a requirement of the
document, it will be referred to as ‘the policy’.
Airports Act 1996. The noise modelling that determines
the ANEF contours may be reviewed every five years
in association with reviews of the master plan for
2 INTRODUCTION AND
Perth Airport. The updated ANEF resulting from such
BACKGROUND reviews will be automatically included in this policy
by reference. Updates to the ANEF are subject to a
public consultation process by the Perth Airport Pty
2.1 Importance of Perth Airport Ltd. There will be no additional public consultation
or separate amendment process to this Policy as the
Perth Airport is fundamental to the continued ANEF is updated from time to time, as amendments
development of the Perth metropolitan region and the will occur automatically and concurrently. The effect
State as a whole. Investment in airport infrastructure of amendments to the ANEF may include alterations
and the economic opportunities associated with to the areas of land to which the development control
the operation of the airport are now recognised provisions of this Policy apply.
as important and perhaps critical elements in the
prosperity of a city such as Perth.
2.4 Policy measures
Accordingly, the airport and its ongoing development
need to be recognised in the planning of the region, Policy measures have been based on Table 2.1 from
and its operation protected, as far as practicable, AS2021 – Building Site Acceptability Based on ANEF Zones.
from development that could potentially prejudice its However, the policy measures included in this policy
performance. One of the main issues to be addressed provide more definitive guidance on those matters
in the planning of areas in the vicinity of the airport is identified as discretionary in AS2021. It should be
aircraft noise, which is the focus of this policy. noted that AS2021 is purely advisory, and has no direct
statutory application.
2.2 Aircraft noise measurement
3 APPLICATION OF THE
The system of aircraft noise measurement used
in Australia for the purposes of evaluating land POLICY
use compatibility is known as the Australian Noise
Exposure Forecast (ANEF) system. This system is
This policy applies to land in the vicinity of Perth
employed to produce the following noise measures,
Airport, which is, or may be in the future affected by
which are usually illustrated in the form of noise
aircraft noise. Policy measures outlined in Section 5
exposure contours.
apply to the land within the 20 ANEF noise contour.
• ANEF – being a noise exposure forecast for a
particular time in the future or based on particular
circumstances such as ultimate capacity; and 4 POLICY OBJECTIVES
• ANEI – being a noise exposure index based on data
for a previous year where the exact numbers and The objectives of this policy are to:
types of aircraft that used the airport are known.
• protect Perth Airport from unreasonable
encroachment by incompatible (noise-sensitive)
development, to provide for its ongoing
development and operation; and
• minimise the impact of airport operations on
existing and future communities with reference to
aircraft noise.

State Planning Policy 5.1 2
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
5 POLICY MEASURES however, noise nuisance may still be experienced in
areas below the 20 ANEF exposure level, particularly in
the case of newly exposed communities.
5.1 Interpretation
5.3 Areas between 20 ANEF
ANEF level
and 25 ANEF
Refers to the level of noise exposure forecast under
the ANEF. Noise exposure contours are illustrated at
5.3.1 Zoning
intervals of five ANEF units, beginning at 20 ANEF and
ranging up to 40 ANEF, with 40 being closest to the (1) Zoning and associated development control
airport. provisions should take into consideration the
level of noise exposure forecast for the area and
Noise exposure zone
the building site acceptability for the particular
Refers to the areas within a specified range of noise noise exposure zone as identified in Appendix
exposure levels as illustrated on the current Airservices 1. This includes structure planning by which
Australia endorsed ANEF. Noise exposure zones development is controlled.
referred to in this policy include:
(2) Land uses that provide for development of
• areas below 20 ANEF; building types identified as ‘Conditionally
Acceptable’ with reference to the building site
• areas between 20 ANEF and 25 ANEF; and
acceptability table in Appendix 1, should be subject
• areas above 25 ANEF.
to discretionary control under local planning
In the case of sites that are dissected by one or more of schemes. Such development includes:
the nominated noise exposure contours, the following
• dwellings and caravan parks
interpretation shall apply:
• educational establishments
(i) where the site has an area less than 1,000m2 the
• child-care premises
noise exposure zone for the whole site shall be
deemed to be the level to which the majority of • hospitals and nursing homes
the site is subject; and • places of worship
(ii) where the site has an area greater than 1,000m2 • cinemas, theatres and exhibition centres.
the noise exposure zone shall be determined
(3) It is not intended that this policy would affect the
separately for the individual parts of the site into
existing use or zoning of land.
which it is divided by the relevant noise exposure
contour(s).
5.3.2 Residential density
Building site acceptability
Where land is zoned for residential purposes or
Refers to the acceptability of sites for particular
to permit residential development, the maximum
building types within various ANEF zones. Appendix 1
dwelling density should generally be limited to R20,
includes a classification of building site acceptability,
except where:
which has been adapted from AS2021. Building types
are classified as ‘Acceptable’, ‘Conditionally Acceptable’ • land is identified as appropriate for more intensive
or ‘Unacceptable’ depending on the sensitivity of development through strategic planning
associated use or occupation of the building and the instruments such as a regional or sub-regional
level of noise exposure forecast for the site. structure plan;
• a higher density coding is desirable to facilitate
5.2 Areas below 20 ANEF redevelopment or infill development of an existing
residential area; and
There is no restriction on zoning or development
• it can be demonstrated that the public benefits
within this noise exposure zone, which is identified as
of higher density coding outweigh the negative
‘Acceptable’ for all building types in the building site
impacts of exposing additional residents to aircraft
acceptability table in Appendix 1. According to AS2021
noise.

State Planning Policy 5.1 3
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
5.3.3 Subdivision and strata subdivision • background noise level to which the site is
subject;
(1) Subdivision and/or strata subdivision may be
approved, provided it is consistent with the zoning • times of day or night when overflights are likely
and density coding of the land. to occur;
(2) Where no density coding is prescribed for • frequency of overflights by the various classes
‘Residential’ zoned land, the maximum density of aircraft; and
should generally be limited to R20, except as • occupational characteristics of the proposed
provided for in relation to the application of development.
residential density controls under clause 5.3.2.
(3) Closure of windows and other openings to
habitable rooms can significantly reduce the
5.3.4 Development
intrusion of aircraft noise. This will normally require
(1) Development may be approved provided it is forced ventilation, and may also necessitate some
consistent with the zoning and density coding of form of active cooling, such as refrigerative air
the land under the local planning scheme, local conditioning. The operational management of
development plan or local structure plan. buildings however, is outside the ambit of this
policy, and will therefore be subject only to advice.
(2) In the case of development that is subject to
(Refer clause 5.3.7).
discretionary control under a local planning
scheme (as provided for under clause 5.3.1), the
5.3.6 Notification on title
impact of aircraft noise on the users or occupiers
of the development should be taken into A ‘notice on title’ advising of the potential for noise
consideration in the determination of applications, nuisance is to be required as a condition of any
and where relevant, in the imposition of conditions subdivision or planning approval within this noise
of approval. exposure zone except where the proposed building
(3) Where no density coding is prescribed for type is identified as ‘Acceptable’ in the building site
‘Residential’ zoned land, the maximum density acceptability table in Appendix 1. Standard wording to
should generally be limited to R20, except as be used in notices on title is included in Appendix 3.
provided for in relation to the application of
residential density controls under clause 5.3.2 5.3.7 Advice
(1) Information should be given to prospective
5.3.5 Noise insulation
purchasers of noise-sensitive premises about the
(1) Noise insulation is not mandatory for residential potential for aircraft noise nuisance. Such advice
development within this noise exposure zone. should be provided by local government in
Some areas however, may experience peak aircraft conjunction with the issue of zoning certificates
noise levels in excess of the Indoor Design Sound and/or property inquiries.
Levels specified in AS2021, and noise insulation is
(2) Advice should be provided in association
recommended in such cases. Guidance on noise
with applications for planning approval and
insulation measures are contained within the
building permits, of the potential for noise
Western Australian Planning Commission report,
nuisance and any noise insulation requirements
Aircraft Noise Insulation for Residential Development
or recommendations in accordance with the
in the Vicinity of Perth Airport, 2004.
provisions of clause 5.3.5. Developers should also
(2) Noise insulation requirements for development be made aware of the benefits of window closure
other than residential that is identified as and the associated need for forced ventilation.
‘Conditionally Acceptable’ in the building site
(3) Information about aircraft types and the timing
acceptability table in Appendix 1, should be
and frequency of aircraft operations is available
determined in consideration of:
from Perth Airport Pty Ltd. AS2021 includes tables
• levels of aircraft noise likely to be experienced of noise levels for selected aircraft types and
at the site; locations, in terms of distance, in specific proximity
to airport runways.
• likely noise attenuation from the type of
construction proposed;

State Planning Policy 5.1 4
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
5.4 Areas above 25 ANEF ‘Unacceptable’ with reference to the building site
acceptability table in Appendix 1.
5.4.1 Zoning (6) In considering the practicability of alternative land
uses, local government should give particular
(1) Zoning and associated development control
emphasis to areas forecast to be affected by noise
provisions should take into consideration the
exposure levels above 30 ANEF.
level of noise exposure forecast for the area and
(7) It is not intended that this policy would affect the
the building site acceptability for this particular
existing use of land.
noise exposure zone as identified in Appendix
1. This includes structure planning by which
development is controlled. 5.4.2 Residential density
(2) There is a presumption against zoning which may (1) Where alternative (non-residential) zoning of
permit development involving building types existing ‘Residential’ zoned land is not practicable,
identified as ‘Unacceptable’ with reference to the the density of development should generally be
building site acceptability table in Appendix 1. This limited to R12.5. Possible exceptions are where:
includes particularly residential zoning where the
• a higher density is necessary to facilitate
predominant type of development is likely to be
redevelopment or infill development of an existing
housing.
residential area;
(3) Where land has already been zoned to permit
• land is identified as appropriate for more intensive
development defined as ‘Unacceptable’, and
development through strategic planning
where in the opinion of local government, it is not
instruments such as a regional or sub-regional
practicable to allocate the land for alternative uses,
structure plan;
existing zoning may remain.1
• it can be demonstrated that the public benefits
(4) Land uses that provide for development of
of higher density coding outweigh the negative
building types identified as either ‘Conditionally
impacts of exposing additional residents to aircraft
Acceptable’ or ‘Unacceptable’ in the building site
noise; and
acceptability table in Appendix 1, should be subject
• a higher density would facilitate the concurrent
to discretionary control under local planning
provision of noise insulation in accordance with the
schemes. Such development includes:
indoor design sound levels prescribed in AS2021.
• dwellings and caravan parks
(2) In areas subject to noise exposure levels above
• educational establishments
30 ANEF, the permissible density of residential
• child-care premises development should generally not be increased.
• hospitals and nursing homes
5.4.3 Subdivision and strata subdivision
• places of worship
(1) No further subdivision or strata subdivision is to
• hotels and motels
take place where it would result in an increase in
• residential buildings
the number of dwellings that may be developed,
• offices and shops unless it is consistent with the zoning and density
coding of the land under a local planning scheme.
• medical centres
(2) Where no density coding or minimum lot size
• restaurants.
is prescribed for ‘Residential’ zoned land, the
(5) Under no circumstances should ‘Rural’ or other
maximum density should generally be limited
non-residential zoned land be rezoned for
to R12.5, except as provided for in relation to the
residential development or any other form of
application of residential density controls under
development involving building types identified as
clause 5.4.2.
1 Australian Standard 2021 recognises that many non-aviation
factors have to be taken into account in decisions about land use,
and that where established residential development exists, it is
generally not appropriate to apply the recommended land use
compatibility criteria unless the opportunity for re-zoning arises.

State Planning Policy 5.1 5
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
5.4.4 Development particular building type or activity in AS2021.
(Refer to Indoor Design Sound Levels for
(1) No further development is to take place where
Determination of Aircraft Noise Reduction in
it would result in an increase in the number of
Appendix 2).
people likely to be accommodated, unless it is
consistent with the zoning and density coding of (4) Deemed-to-comply noise insulation specifications
the land. for residential development are contained within
section 6 of the Western Australian Planning
(2) In the case of development that is subject to
Commission report, Aircraft Noise Insulation for
discretionary control under an operative local
Residential Development in the Vicinity of Perth
planning scheme (as provided for under clause
Airport, 2004.
5.4.1), the impact of aircraft noise on the users
or occupiers of the development should be (5) Closure of windows and other openings to
taken into consideration in the determination of habitable rooms which is necessary to achieve
applications and where relevant, in the imposition the benefits of noise insulation, normally involves
of conditions of approval. forced ventilation, and may also necessitate some
form of active cooling, such as refrigerative air
(3) Where no density coding is prescribed for
conditioning. The operational management of
‘Residential’ zoned land, the maximum density
buildings however, is outside the ambit of this
should generally be limited to R12.5, except as
policy and will therefore be subject only to advice.
provided for in relation to the application of
(Refer clause 5.4.7).
residential density controls under clause 5.4.2.
(6) Heritage listed buildings and pre-existing housing
5.4.5 Noise insulation within a designated heritage area may also
be exempted from the requirements for noise
(1) Noise insulation is required as a condition of
insulation, as provided for under a local planning
planning approval, for all development involving
scheme.2
building types identified as ‘Unacceptable’
(7) Minor additions to existing residential
with reference to the building site acceptability
development involving no more than two
table in Appendix 1. This includes in particular,
habitable rooms and no more than a 25 percent
all new residential development, educational
increase in habitable floor space should be
establishments, hospitals and nursing homes.
exempted from the requirement for noise
(2) Noise insulation requirements for development
insulation.
involving building types identified as ‘Conditionally
(8) Where more substantial additions are proposed,
Acceptable’ in the building site acceptability
the additional areas should be insulated in
table in Appendix 1, should be determined in
accordance with the recommended indoor
consideration of:
design sound levels of AS2021 or otherwise
• levels of aircraft noise likely to be experienced
as provided for in sub-clause (3) above. Noise
at the site;
insulation is not mandatory for the existing areas
• likely noise attenuation from the type of of the house, but is desirable and may, in some
construction proposed; circumstances, be appropriate to meet the indoor
design sound levels prescribed under AS2021 and
• background noise level to which the site is
or the variations provided for in sub-clause (3)
subject;
above. According to AS2021, the requirement for
• times of day or night when overflights are likely
different internal design sound levels for different
to occur;
indoor spaces could require the construction of
• frequency of overflights by the various classes substantial barriers between habitable spaces.
of aircraft; and Accordingly, consideration should be given to a
uniform perimeter insulation approach.
• occupational characteristics of the proposed
development.
2 Local planning schemes prepared in accordance with the
(3) Where practicable, the standard of insulation
Model Scheme Text (clause 7.5) already provide for variations to
required should be based on achievement of development requirements where desirable to facilitate the
indoor design sound levels recommended for the conservation of heritage buildings or preservation of heritage
values in a designated heritage area.

State Planning Policy 5.1 6
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
5.4.6 Notification on title 6. IMPLEMENTATION
A ‘notice on title’ advising of the potential for noise
nuisance is to be required as a condition of any It is intended that this policy be implemented using a
subdivision or planning approval, except where the combination of the following measures:
proposed development is identified as ‘Acceptable’
• zoning and density coding;
for the relevant ANEF level in the building site
• development controls;
acceptability table in Appendix 1. Standard wording to
be used on notices on title is included in Appendix 3. • subdivision control;
• referral arrangements; and
5.4.7 Advice
• notification and advice.
(1) Information should be given to prospective
purchasers of noise-sensitive premises about the 6.1 Zoning and density coding
potential for aircraft noise nuisance. Such advice
should be provided by local government in (1) Local government should have due regard to the
conjunction with the issue of zoning certificates objectives and policy measures outlined in Section
and/or property inquiries. 5 when reviewing local planning schemes. This
relates to all land forecast to be affected by noise
(2) Advice should be provided, in association
exposure levels above the 20 ANEF contour.
with applications for planning approval and
building permits, of the potential for noise (2) In those areas with potential for further subdivision
nuisance and any noise insulation requirements or redevelopment, consideration should be given
or recommendations in accordance with the to ways in which the effects of aircraft noise can
provisions of clause 5.4.5. Developers should also be reduced. Where practicable, noise-sensitive
be made aware of the benefits of window closure uses should be prohibited in noise exposure zones
and the associated need for forced ventilation. for which the relevant building type is classified
as ‘Unacceptable’ in the building site acceptability
(3) Information about aircraft types and the timing
table in Appendix 1.
and frequency of aircraft operations is available
from Perth Airport Pty Ltd. AS2021 includes tables
6.2 Development control
of noise levels for selected aircraft types and
locations, in terms of distance, in specific proximity
(1) Where practicable, local governments should
to airport runways.
include special control areas, or other provisions,
in local planning schemes to provide an additional
head of power to control development in areas
within the 20 ANEF contour.
(2) As well as being defined on local planning scheme
maps, special control areas should provide for
supplementary control of development in order to
address the policy measures detailed in Section 5.
Relevant provisions should include:
• requirement for planning approval for all noise-
sensitive development, including particularly
single houses in noise-affected areas;
• discretionary provisions to enable applications
to be refused where the development would
be inconsistent with this policy;
• discretionary provisions to facilitate the
imposition of conditions to address the
requirements of this policy with respect to
noise reduction in buildings, i.e. insulation; and

State Planning Policy 5.1 7
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
• discretionary provisions to facilitate the • Development involving penetration of the
registration of notices on title where land is prescribed airspace or other controlled activities
affected by aircraft noise above 20 ANEF. as prescribed in the Airports (Protection of Airspace)
Regulations, 1996.
6.3 Subdivision control • Prescribed airspace is defined under the Airports
(Protection of Airspace) Regulations, 1996 as the
(1) The Western Australian Planning Commission is
airspace above any part of either an Obstacle
responsible for the control of subdivision under
Limitation Service (OLS) or Procedures for Air
the Planning and Development Act, 2005 as well
Navigation Systems Operations (PAN-OPS) surface.
as certain classes of strata subdivision under the
• Height above ground contours have been
Strata Titles Act, 1985. In exercising its discretion
prepared by Perth Airport Pty Ltd, to assist local
in relation to applications for subdivision and
government in relation to the referral process with
strata subdivision the Western Australian Planning
respect to prescribed airspace.
Commission will have due regard to this policy.
Land use
(2) Local government should also have regard to
this policy in making its recommendations to • Non-structural activities (artificial light, sunlight,
the Western Australian Planning Commission on emissions of smoke, dust and other particulate
applications for subdivision and those classes matter, and emissions of steam or other gas)
of strata subdivision for which the approval of subject to approval under the Airports (Protection of
the Commission is required or in making its Airspace) Regulations, 1996.
decision where local government is the delegated
• Further information concerning referral and
authority.
approval requirements under the Commonwealth
legislation may be obtained from the Federal
6.4 Referral arrangements Department of Infrastructure and Regional
Development website.
Proposals involving any of the following should be
• Use or development of land in the vicinity of the
referred by the relevant local government or in the
airport that are likely to attract significant gathering
case of subdivision, the Western Australian Planning
of birds. Information on this issue may be obtained
Commission, to Perth Airport Pty Ltd for comment and
from Perth Airport Pty Ltd.
advice.
Scheme amendments
6.5 Notification and advice
• Increase in density coding above R20 in areas
between 20 ANEF and 25 ANEF. (1) Advice concerning the potential for noise nuisance
can most effectively be administered by the
• Changes of zoning and/or density coding in
relevant local government via property inquiries,
areas above the 25 ANEF noise exposure contour,
zoning certificates and conditions of planning
which have the potential to enable an increase in
approval requiring notices on title. A standard
population density.
notification has been included in Appendix 3.
Subdivision
(2) In the case of proposals involving land subdivision,
• Subdivision of land for residential purposes, where the Western Australian Planning Commission has
the lot sizes would enable development at a the principal role in the provision of advice to
density in excess of that provided for under this applicants and/or the registration of notices on
policy. title, where required.
Development (3) Perth Airport Pty Ltd can provide information
about aircraft noise and the operations of the
• Development identified as ‘Unacceptable’ in the
airport and should be contacted for specific
building site acceptability table in Appendix 1, with
information concerning these matters.
the exception of residential development, which
accords with the density coding applicable under a (4) Local governments may require proponents
local planning scheme. to ensure that adequate information about
the potential for noise nuisance is provided to
prospective property purchases to enable them to
make a fully informed decision.

State Planning Policy 5.1 8
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
Appendix 1
Building site acceptability
(Adapted from AS2021, Table 2.1: Building Site Acceptability Based on ANEF Zones)
Forecast noise exposure level (ANEF)
Building type
less than 20 ANEF 20 to 25 ANEF
25 to 30 ANEF 30 to 35 ANEF
(Note 1) (Note 2)
House, home unit, flat, Conditionally Unacceptable Unacceptable
Acceptable
caravan park Acceptable (Note 4) (Note 5) (Note 4) (Note 5)
Conditionally Unacceptable Unacceptable
School, university Acceptable
Acceptable (Note 4) (Note 5) (Note 4) (Note 5)
Conditionally Unacceptable Unacceptable
Hospital, nursing home Acceptable
Acceptable (Note 4) (Note 5) (Note 4) (Note 5)
Conditionally Unacceptable
Hotel, motel, hostel Acceptable Acceptable
Acceptable (Note 4) (Note 5)
Conditionally Conditionally Unacceptable
Public building Acceptable
Acceptable Acceptable (Note 4) (Note 5)
Conditionally Conditionally
Commercial building Acceptable Acceptable
Acceptable Acceptable
Conditionally
Light Industrial Acceptable Acceptable Acceptable
Acceptable
Other industrial Acceptable Acceptable Acceptable Acceptable
Relevant Notes from Table 2.1 of AS2021:
1. The actual location of the 20 ANEF contour is difficult to define accurately, mainly because of variation in
aircraft flight paths. Therefore, the procedure of Clause 2.3.2 of AS2021 may be followed for building sites
outside but near to the 20 ANEF contour.
2. Within 20 ANEF to 25 ANEF, some people may find that the land is not compatible with residential or
educational uses. Land use authorities may consider that the incorporation of noise control features in the
construction of residences or schools is appropriate.
3. There will be cases where a building of a particular type will contain spaces used for activities which would
generally be found in a different type of building (e.g. an office in an industrial building). In these cases, Table
2.1 should be used to determine site acceptability, but internal design noise levels within the specific spaces
should be determined by Table 3.3 (Appendix 2).
4. This Standard does not recommend development in unacceptable areas. However, where the relevant
planning authority determines that any development may be necessary within existing built-up areas
designated as unacceptable, it is recommended that such development should achieve the required ANR
determined according to Clause 3.2 of AS2021. For residences, schools, etc., the effect of aircraft noise on
outdoor areas associated with the buildings should be considered.
5. In no case should new development take place in greenfield sites deemed unacceptable because such
development may impact airport operations.

State Planning Policy 5.1 9
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
Appendix 2
Indoor design sound levels
(Excerpt from AS2021: Table 3.3)
Table 3.3 Indoor Design Sound Levels* for Determination of Aircraft Noise Reduction
lndoor design sound
Building type and activity
level*, dB(A)
Houses, home units, flats, caravan parks
Sleeping areas, dedicated lounges 50
Other habitable spaces 55
Bathrooms, toilets, laundries 60
Hotels, motels, hostels
Relaxing, sleeping 55
Social activities 70
Service activities 75
Schools, universities
Libraries, study areas 50
Teaching areas, assembly areas (see Note 5) 55
Workshops, gymnasia 75
Hospitals, nursing homes
Wards, theatres, treatment and consulting rooms 50
Laboratories 65
Service areas 75
Public buildings
Churches, religious activities 50
Theatres, cinemas, recording studios (see Note 4) 40
Court houses, libraries, galleries 50
Commercial buildings, offices and shops
Private offices, conference rooms 55
Drafting, open offices 65
Typing, data processing 70
Shops, supermarkets, showrooms 75
Industrial
Inspection, analysis, precision work 75
Light machinery, assembly, bench work 80
Notes from Table 3.3 of AS2021:
* These indoor design sound levels are not intended to be used for measurement of adequacy of construction.
For measurement of the adequacy of construction against aircraft noise intrusion see Appendix D of AS2021.
1 The indoor design sound levels in Column 2 are hypothesized values based on Australian experience. A
design sound level is the maximum level (dB(A)) from an aircraft flyover which, when heard inside a building
by the average listener, will be judged as not intrusive or annoying by that listener while carrying out the
specified activity. Owing to the variability of subjective responses to aircraft noise, these figures will not
provide sufficiently low interior noise levels for occupants who have a particular sensitivity to aircraft noise.

State Planning Policy 5.1 10
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
2 Some of these levels, because of the short duration of individual aircraft flyovers, exceed some other criteria
published by Standards Australia for indoor background noise levels (see AS2107).
3 The indoor design sound levels are intended for the sole purpose of designing adequate construction against
aircraft noise intrusion and are not intended to be used for assessing the effects of noise. Land use planning
authorities may have their own internal noise level requirements which may be used in place of the levels
above.
4 For opera and concert halls and theatres, and for recording, broadcast and television studios and similar
buildings where noise intrusion is unacceptable, specialist acoustic advice should always be obtained.
5 Certain activities in schools may be considered particularly noise sensitive and 50 dB(A) may be a more
desirable indoor sound level to select for any teaching areas used for such activities. However, the effect of
other noise sources should be considered.
6 The provisions of this standard relating to different internal design sound levels for different indoor
spaces could result in the use of different construction and materials in contiguous spaces, and require
the construction of substantial barriers between habitable spaces, e.g. heavy self-closing internal doors,
detracting from the amenity of the building. Therefore consideration should be given to a uniform perimeter
insulation approach.

State Planning Policy 5.1 11
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
Appendix 3
Notification About Aircraft Noise To Be Placed On Property Title
NOTIFICATION: This property is situated in the vicinity of Perth Airport and is currently affected, or may be
affected in the future by aircraft noise. Noise exposure levels are likely to increase in the future as
a result of an increase in aircraft using the airport, changes in aircraft type or other operational
changes. Further information about aircraft noise is available from the Perth Airport website.
Information regarding development restrictions and noise insulation requirements for noise-
affected property is available on request from the relevant local government offices.

State Planning Policy 5.1 12
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
ANEF
Australian Noise Exposure Forecast – as endorsed by Airservices Australia and as amended from
time to time. The ANEF is a cumulative measure of aircraft noise exposure that takes into account the
following features of aircraft noise:
• the intensity, duration, tonal content and spectrum of audible frequencies of the noise from
aircraft take offs, approaches to landing, and reverse thrust after landing;
• the forecast frequency of aircraft types and movements on the various flight paths; and
• the average daily distribution of aircraft arrivals and departures in both daytime and night time.
(Daytime is defined as being between the hours of 7.00am and 7.00pm).
ANEI
Australian Noise Exposure Index – based on data for a previous year where the exact numbers and
types of aircraft that used the airport are known.
AS2021
Australian Standard 2021 Acoustics – Aircraft noise intrusion – Building siting and construction
Building site acceptability
Refers to the acceptability of sites for particular building types within various ANEF zones. Appendix 1
includes a classification of building site acceptability, which has been adapted from AS2021. Building
types are classified as ‘Acceptable’, ‘Conditionally Acceptable’ or ‘Unacceptable’ depending on the
sensitivity of associated use or occupation of the building and the level of noise exposure forecast
for the site.
Noise exposure zone
Refers to the areas within a specified range of noise exposure.
Noise sensitive premises
Premises occupied or designed for occupation or use for residential purposes (including dwellings,
residential buildings or short-stay accommodation), caravan park, camping ground, educational
establishment, child care premises, hospital, nursing home or place of worship.
OLS
Obstacle Limitation Surface.
PANS OPS
Procedures for Air Navigation Systems Operations.

State Planning Policy 5.1 13
Land use planning in the vicinity of Perth Airport
REFERENCES
Australian Capital Territory Planning Authority, 1996, Draft Noise Management Guidelines.
Australian Standards, 2000, AS 2021-2000, Acoustics—Aircraft Noise Intrusion—Building Siting and
Construction.
Commonwealth Department of Transport and Regional Services, 2000, Expanding Ways to Describe
and Assess Aircraft Noise.
Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions, United Kingdom, 1999, Public Safety
Zones: A Consultation Document.
Report on the Senate Select Committee on Aircraft Noise in Sydney, 1995, Falling on Deaf Ears.
Riskcorp Australia Pty Ltd, 1992, Perth Airport Hazards of Airport Operations, September.
Sinclair Knight Merz, 1999, Perth International Airport Master Plan and Environmental Strategy.
Sinclair Knight Merz, 1999, Aircraft Noise—Supplementary Technical Report to the Perth International
Airport Draft Master Plan and Environmental Strategy.
State Planning Commission Western Australia, 1990, Land Use Planning in the Vicinity of Airports: Report
of the Working Group.
Westralia Airports Corporation, 1999, Perth International Airport Masterplan and Environment Strategy.
Westralia Airports Corporation, 2000, Perth International Airport: Aircraft Noise Management Strategy.
Western Australian Planning Commission, 2004, Aircraft Noise Insulation for Residential Development in
the Vicinity of Perth Airport.