Child Care Premises Local Planning Policy
Responsible directorate: Planning and Community Development
Objective: • To provide development standards for the location, siting and design of child care
premises.
• To ensure that child care premises do not have an adverse impact on the amenity
of surrounding areas, particularly residential areas.
1. Authority:
This policy has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2 of the deemed provisions
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 which allows the
local government to prepare local planning policies relating to planning and development within
the Scheme area.
2. Application:
This policy applies to the whole of the City of Joondalup.
3. Definitions:
“child care premises” as defined in Local Planning Scheme No 3 means premises where:
(a) an education and care service as defined in the Education and Care Services National
Law (Western Australia) section 5(1), other than a family day care service as defined in
that section, is provided; or
(b) a child care service as defined in the Child Services Act 2007 section 4 is provided.
“district distributor A and B road” means a road as defined in the Western Australian Road
Hierarchy produced by Main Roads Western Australia.
“local distributor road” means a road as defined in the Western Australian Road Hierarchy
produced by Main Roads Western Australia.
Child Care Premises 1

4. Statement:
In considering applications for child care premises, the location, siting and design of the child
care premises will be taken into consideration with the aim of ensuring that the development is
compatible with, and avoids adverse impacts on, the amenity of adjoining and surrounding
areas.
5. Details:
In assessing an application for development approval for child care premises, the following will
apply:
5.1. Location:
The appropriate location of child care premises is crucial in avoiding adverse impacts on
surrounding properties, particularly in terms of additional traffic, car parking and noise.
a. Child care premises are most appropriately located within the ‘mixed use’,
‘commercial’, ‘service commercial’ or ‘private community purposes’ zone.
b. In order to minimise potential adverse impacts a child care premises may have on
the amenity of residential properties, particularly as a result of noise, increased
traffic, and building scale, a child care premises will only be considered in the
‘Residential’ zone where it:
i. directly adjoins non-residential uses such as shopping centres, medical centres
or consulting rooms, schools, parks or community purpose buildings on at least
one boundary.
ii. accommodates a maximum of 50 children.
iii. has a maximum building site coverage of 50%.
c. Where a proposed child care premises adjoins a residential property, the applicant is
required to demonstrate how the proposal will not have an undue impact on
residential amenity in terms of noise, location of car parking, increased traffic and
building scale.
5.2. Road hierarchy:
a. Child care premises can be reasonably high traffic-generators. Therefore, in order to
minimise their impact on the street network, child care premises are required to:
i. be located on local distributor roads;
ii. be located in such a manner that they would:
• not conflict with traffic control devices;
• not encourage unsafe vehicle movements; and
• not encourage the use of nearby Access Roads for turning movements;
iii. not be located in, or on the corner of, a cul-de-sac road.
Child Care Premises 2

5.3. Parking and access:
5.3.1. Car parking standard:
a. Car parking bays are to be provided in accordance with the following table:
Use class Number of on-site parking bays
Child care premises 1 per employee plus
5 per ≤ 25 children
6 per 26–30 children
7 per 31–56 children
8 per 57–64 children
9 per 65–72 children
10 per 73–80 children
11 per 81–88 children
12 per 89–96 children
13 per 97–104 children
14 per 105 + children
Note: ACROD bays are included in the number of on-site bays required.
5.3.2. Car park location and design:
a. Car park access and design is to be in accordance with the following requirements:
Use class Number of on-site parking bays
a. Car park location i. All car parking is to be provided on-site; verge
parking is not permitted.
ii. Car parks must be clearly visible from the street
to encourage parking on-site instead of on the
road verge.
b. Car park design i. Car parks shall be designed in accordance with
Australian Standards AS 2890.1 and/or AS
2890.2 as amended from time to time.
c. Vehicle access i. Vehicle access shall be taken from Local
Distributor Roads.
ii. ‘Two-way’ vehicle access is required in
accordance with Figure 1.
iii. Vehicles are required to enter and exit the site
in forward gear.
d. Pedestrian access i. A footpath must be provided from the car park
and the street to the building entrance.
PARKING LAYOUTS
TYPE 1 TYPE 2
Figure 1. Vehicle access
Child Care Premises 3

5.3.3. Bicycle parking standards:
a. Bicycle parking is to be provided in accordance with the following table and
relevant Australian standards.
Use class Employee/visitor bicycle parking
Child care premises 1 per 8 employees
5.4. Building height:
a. The maximum building height as measured from the natural ground level is to be in
accordance with the following table:
Maximum building height
Top of external wall
Top of external wall Top of pitched roof
(concealed roof)
6 metres 7 metres 9 metres
5.5. Building design:
5.5.1. Building setbacks:
a. Building setbacks in the ‘Residential’ zone are to be in accordance with Part 5
of the R-Codes, with the exception of the following:
Minimum primary street Minimum secondary
R-Code
setback distance street setback distance
R5 12 metres 6 metres
R20 and R25 6 metres 1.5 metres
R30 and above 4 metres 1.5 metres
b. Building setbacks in all other zones are to be in accordance with the setback
requirements for that zone or in accordance with any relevant structure plan,
activity centre plan or local development plan.
5.5.2. Noise attenuation:
a. The layout and design of childcare premises must consider noise attenuation
measures to reduce the noise impact on adjacent properties. Noise-generating
activities such as outdoor play areas, vehicle accessways, car parking areas
and any plant and equipment shall be located away from noise-sensitive land
uses (such as residences).
b. The design and construction of childcare premises must also consider
measures to reduce the impacts of noise from external sources, to achieve
acceptable indoor noise within the childcare premises. These measures shall
include consideration of the size and placement of windows and doors, the use
of double-glazing, fencing, landscaping and the location of vehicle
accessways, car parking areas and any plant and equipment.
c. An acoustic report prepared by a suitably qualified person shall be submitted
with the application for development approval. A noise management plan is
also required where identified by the acoustic report.
Child Care Premises 4

5.5.3. Building appearance
a. Child care premises in the ‘residential’ zone must be of residential appearance,
in keeping with the surrounding environment, and not detract from the amenity
of adjoining properties.
5.5.4. Servicing
a. Services must be screened from view and located away from residential
properties. Servicing is to be in accordance with the following requirements:
Use class Number of on-site parking bays
a. Bin storage areas i. Bin storage areas must be screened from view
by a wall not less than 1.8 metres in height,
constructed of brick, masonry or other approved
material.
iii. Bin storage areas must be accessible to waste
collection vehicles and not adversely affect car
parking and vehicular or pedestrian access.
b. Plant and equipment i. Plant and equipment must be screened from
view from the street through building design and
located on the roof, basement or at the rear of
the building.
5.6. Landscaping
a. Landscaping is to be in accordance with the following requirements:
Design element Development requirement
a. % landscaping i. A minimum of 8% of the area of a lot shall be
landscaped.
ii. The landscaped area shall include a minimum
strip of 1.5 metres wide adjacent to all street
boundaries.
b. Size i. The landscaped area shall have a minimum
width of 1.0 metre and distributed in areas of not
less than 4.0 square metres
c. Shade trees i. Shade trees shall be provided and maintained in
uncovered car parks at the rate of one tree for
every four car parking bays.
ii. One small shade tree shall be provided for each
lot in addition to those required for uncovered
car parks.
d. Verge area i. The verge areas of all child care premises are
required to be suitably landscaped, reticulated
and maintained to discourage patrons from
parking on the verge. The verge is not permitted
to be paved or sealed as this would encourage
its use for parking.
Child Care Premises 5

5.7. Hours of operation:
a. The days and hours of operation for child care premises within the ‘residential’ zone
or abutting or opposite the ‘residential’ zone are to be in accordance with the
following:
Days Operating hours
Monday to Friday 7.00 am to 6.00 pm*
Saturday 8.00 am to 1.00 pm
Sunday Not permitted
*Staff are permitted on site 30 minutes prior to and after the stipulated hours of
operation.
5.8. Applications for development approval:
a. In addition to the general requirements for an application for development approval,
the following are required at the time of lodgement:
• Traffic and Road Safety Impact Report
• Acoustic Report
5.9. Public consultation:
a. Refer to the City's Planning Consultation Local Planning Policy.
Creation date: June 1999 (CJ213-06/99)
Formerly: Child Care Centres Policy
Amendments: CJ213-06/99, CJ206-10/05, CJ207-10/07, CJ126-07/08, CJ052-04/08,
CJ110-06/13, CJ174-10/17, CJ033-03/20, CJ007-02/22
Last reviewed: February 2022 (CJ007-02/22)
Related documentation: • Child Care Services Act 2007
• City of Joondalup Local Planning Scheme No 3
• Education and Care Services National Law (WA) Act 2012
• Main Roads Western Australia Road Hierarchy
• Planning Consultation Local Planning Policy
File reference: 85510
Child Care Premises 6