PRINT POST APPROVED PP665002/00041
WESTERN
1061
AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT
ISSN 1448-949X
PERTH, FRIDAY, 17 MARCH 2006 No. 46
SPECIAL
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY JOHN A. STRIJK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER AT 3.45 PM
© STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN PLANNING
COMMISSION
STATEMENT OF PLANNING POLICY No. 3
URBAN GROWTH AND SETTLEMENT
Prepared under section 5AA of the
Town Planning and Development Act 1928 (as amended)
by the Western Australian Planning Commission
Western Australian Planning Commission
Albert Facey House
469 Wellington Street
Perth,Western Australia 6000
February 2006



17 March 2006 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 1063
CONTENTS
1 Citation
2 Introduction and background
3 Application of the policy
4 Objectives of the policy
5 Policy measures
5.1 Creating sustainable communities
5.2 Managing urban growth and settlement across Western Australia
5.3 Managing urban growth in Metropolitan Perth
5.4 Planning for liveable neighbourhoods
5.5 Coordination of services and infrastructure
5.6 Managing rural-residential growth
5.7 Planning for Aboriginal communities
6 Implementation
Statement of Planning Policy No. 3



17 March 2006 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 1065
1. Citation
This Statement of Planning Policy is made under section 5AA of the Town Planning and
Development Act 1928. This policy may be cited as Statement of Planning Policy No. 3: Urban
Growth and Settlement.
2. Introduction and Background
This policy sets out the principles and considerations which apply to planning for urban
growth and settlement in Western Australia. It is a broad sector policy under Statement of
Planning Policy No.1: State Planning Framework. The policy will be implemented by more
detailed policies on particular matters relating to planning for urban settlements that require
additional guidance.
A high proportion of the population of Western Australia (over 90%) live in towns and cities.
The pattern of settlement and quality of the urban environment is, therefore, highly
significant to the lifestyle enjoyed by the population. A well planned and coherent settlement
pattern and careful management of urban growth and change is critical in delivering wider
social, economic and environmental objectives, for example, in providing choice in housing
and lifestyle opportunities, easy access to employment, services and recreational
opportunities for people of all ages and abilities, a strong and shared sense of community, and
good urban design and neighbourhood planning to create liveable, efficient and attractive
communities.
Western Australia is a sparsely settled State. The majority of the population of around 2
million is concentrated south-west of a line between Lancelin and Albany. Metropolitan Perth
is the focus of population and economic activity with a population of 1.5 million (including
Peel). Other major population centres in the south-west are Bunbury, Busselton, Collie,
Northam and Albany.
Elsewhere in the State, the pattern of settlement reflects the economic and social
development of the different regions—predominantly mining and pastoralism in the north
and east and agriculture in the mid-west and wheatbelt. This pattern is one of ports, fishing
towns and holiday centres along the coast, remote mining towns in the north and east located
at the source of mineral resources, and small towns scattered throughout the agricultural
regions. Most of the population is concentrated in the major regional centres at Kalgoorlie-
Boulder, Geraldton, Esperance, Carnarvon, Karratha, Port Hedland, Broome and Kununurra.
The State is growing and changing. In the last 30 years the population has almost doubled to
around 2 million and is expected to rise to 2.9 million by 2031. The most rapid growth is
occurring in the Perth region and along the coast. The population of Metropolitan Perth
including Peel is expected to reach 2.2 million by 2031 representing 76% of the estimated
State population of 2.9 million.
There is continued pressure for development in coastal locations particularly for tourism
projects, holiday homes and for people seeking a lifestyle change from city living. Often
proposals for such development are deficient in employment and other services, and are also
heavily car dependent. Coastal development needs to be carefully planned to ensure beaches,
dunes, estuaries and coastal wetlands are protected, the risk of storm damage and shoreline
erosion is carefully managed and urban development is located where it is feasible to provide
essential infrastructure, employment, services and public transport. The Commission’s
Statement of Planning Policy No. 2.6 State Coastal Planning Policy sets out the principles for
coastal planning and management and encourages concentration of urban development in
and around existing settlements particularly those with established infrastructure and
services.
In Metropolitan Perth and many of the regional cities and towns, much of the new
development has been in the form of low density suburban growth. This pattern of growth
was a response to consumer preferences and market forces of the time. Suburban
development has reflected the collective wishes of households for the single detached house
and garden, and unrestricted mobility.
There is increasing recognition that the spread of urban development intensifies pressures on
valuable land and water resources, imposes costs in the provision of infrastructure and
services, increases dependence on private cars and creates potential inequities for those living
in the outer suburbs where job opportunities and services are not so readily available. Some
suburbs lack a sense of community and people feel isolated. There are also costs involved
because of the dependence on cars for meeting daily travel needs when it would be easier for
people to walk or cycle to their destinations.
Whilst the majority preference is still for the suburban home, community expectations and
preferences are also changing towards more compact patterns of development. Households
are becoming more diverse. The population is ageing and there is an increasing proportion of
smaller households seeking a wider range of housing types other than the conventional
suburban home. More people are attracted to compact, mixed use developments freeing them
from maintaining large gardens and dependency on the car. There is a greater interest in
returning to established neighbourhoods.
In some existing suburbs there are factors which inhibit high density development such as
the established neighbourhood character, available infrastructure and services and
community sentiment. State and local governments, developers, service providers and the
Statement of Planning Policy No. 3

1066 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 17 March 2006
community need to work together to support more consolidated development in appropriate
locations where consistent with neighbourhood character and where the necessary services
are available or can be provided.
In the new suburbs, there is an increasing drive to return to the traditional neighbourhood
form with more of a sense of community as well as access to jobs, services and public
transport.
The trend is to create more liveable communities in the new suburbs, revitalise and enhance
neighbourhoods in existing urban areas, provide for variety in housing and living
environments, widen the range of transport choices, conserve water and other natural
resources, and provide for wider social interaction and opportunity.
Affordability of housing is a key issue. There is a need to maintain a supply of affordable land
for housing and affordable housing products for all in the community including those with
special needs. The majority of new affordable housing land is in the outlying suburbs
reinforcing the need for medium and higher density housing in inner and middle suburbs for
low to middle income households as well as in the growth corridors. There is also a need to
design the built environment in a way which reduces the fear and incidence of crime and
which enhances community pride.
In the regions, whilst the larger regional centres such as Geraldton, Kalgoorlie, Broome and
Esperance have continued to grow, some of the smaller country towns have declined due to
reduced employment opportunities and social change as people have moved out of the rural
settlements into urban centres.
In the mining and resource sector, improvements in mobility brought about by more cost
effective travel, has seen the growth of the fly-in fly-out workforce often accommodated at
mine sites. There are concerns that fly-in fly-out working arrangements do little to contribute
to the local economy and the viability of regional towns and communities. The resources
sector, however, regards fly-in fly-out as critical for remote mining operations and in
attracting skilled workers. There is a need to promote investment in regional communities
whilst recognizing that fly-in fly-out arrangements will often be necessary due to remoteness
and to attract skilled workers.
The overall aim of the policy is to facilitate sustainable patterns of urban growth and
settlement by setting out the requirements of sustainable settlements and communities and
the broad policy in accommodating growth and change. This policy should be taken into
account in preparing regional and local planning strategies, and planning schemes and
amendments, and given weight in statutory decision making in relation to urban growth and
settlement.
3. Application of the Policy
The policy applies throughout Western Australia.
4. Objectives of the Policy
The objectives of this policy are—
• To promote a sustainable and well planned pattern of settlement across the State, with
sufficient and suitable land to provide for a wide variety of housing, employment,
recreation facilities and open space.
• To build on existing communities with established local and regional economies,
concentrate investment in the improvement of services and infrastructure and enhance
the quality of life in those communities.
• To manage the growth and development of urban areas in response to the social and
economic needs of the community and in recognition of relevant climatic, environmental,
heritage and community values and constraints.
• To promote the development of a sustainable and liveable neighbourhood form which
reduces energy, water and travel demand whilst ensuring safe and convenient access to
employment and services by all modes, provides choice and affordability of housing and
creates an identifiable sense of place for each community.
• To coordinate new development with the efficient, economic and timely provision of
infrastructure and services.
5. Policy Measures
5.1 Creating sustainable communities
Sustainability is central to the planning system in Western Australia. Sustainability requires
us to integrate the social, economic and environmental consequences of land use and
development in order to deliver a better quality of life now and for future generations. The
planning system is uniquely placed to influence the quality of life of communities because of
its capacity to resolve conflicts and deliver solutions which balance social, economic and
environmental objectives.
It is the policy of the Commission to create sustainable communities, that is, cities, towns and
other places which provide for high levels of employment and economic growth; strong,
vibrant and socially inclusive communities; effective protection of the environment; and the
prudent use of resources.
Statement of Planning Policy No. 3

17 March 2006 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 1067
The key requirements for sustainable communities are—
• a strong, diversified and sustainable economic base with assured access to jobs and
employment;
• sufficient and suitable serviced land in the right locations for housing, employment,
commercial, recreational and other purposes, coordinated with the efficient and economic
provision of transport, essential infrastructure and human services;
• variety and choice in the size, type and affordability of housing to support a range of
household sizes, ages and incomes and which is responsive to housing demand and
preferences;
• affordable land for housing and affordable housing products in both greenfield and
brownfield locations to ensure the housing needs of all the community can be met
including those with special needs;
• making the most efficient use of land in existing urban areas through the use of vacant
and under-utilised land and buildings, and higher densities where these can be achieved
without detriment to neighbourhood character and heritage values; the cost-effective use
of urban land and buildings, schools and community services, infrastructure systems and
established neighbourhoods; and promoting and encouraging urban development that is
consistent with the efficient use of energy;
• directing urban expansion into designated growth areas which are, or will be, well
serviced by employment and public transport;
• supporting higher residential densities in the most accessible locations, such as, in and
around town and neighbourhood centres, high frequency public transport nodes and
interchanges, major tertiary institutions and hospitals, and adjacent to high amenity
areas such as foreshores and parks;
• clustering retail, employment, recreational and other activities which attract large
numbers of people in existing and proposed activity centres at major public transport
nodes so as to reduce the need to travel, encourage non-car modes and create attractive,
high amenity mixed use urban centres;
• access for all to employment, health, education, shops, leisure and community facilities
by locating new development so as to be accessible by foot, bicycle or public transport
rather than having to depend on access by car (whilst recognising the convenience of car
travel for some trips and the limited potential to provide alternatives in rural and remote
locations);
• good urban design which creates and enhances community identity, sense of place,
liveability and social interaction in new and existing neighbourhoods;
• designing the urban environment in a way which reduces the opportunities for, and fear
of, crime;
• proper consideration of the environment, recognising the need to restore and enhance as
well as protect biodiversity and to minimise development impacts on land, water, energy,
minerals, basic raw materials, agriculture and other natural resources that help sustain
urban economies and society;
• a positive planning framework which seeks to actively facilitate and promote good quality
development, rather than overly focussing on regulation and controls, in ways which
contribute to economic growth, support safe, sustainable and liveable communities, and
improve the quality of life, and with community involvement appropriate to the level of
planning; and
• a focus on building partnerships between State and local government, service providers,
industry groups, developers, businesses and the community in the planning and design of
cities, towns and rural settlements.
The key elements of the State Planning Strategy are reinforced in this policy.
In the State Planning Strategy, future planning for the south-west of the State is
encapsulated in the south-west urban system which is further refined and articulated in the
strategy for Metropolitan Perth. The growth of Perth will be carefully managed with a shift
away from urban expansion on the fringe of the city to the consolidation of established urban
areas whilst still maintaining an adequate supply of land for development in the growth
areas. Bunbury, Busselton and Albany will continue to develop as major centres. Land
between the towns and cities will be conserved in rural use for agricultural production,
landscape, conservation and lifestyle purposes.
For the regions, the State Planning Strategy promotes the consolidation and expansion of
existing settlements to make regional communities sustainable in the long-term. There is
likewise a need to avoid ad-hoc and disbursed new settlements and the expansion of existing
settlements which are remote from existing and planned services and will create competition
with towns better placed to accommodate growth and expansion.
New settlements and major town expansions should only be considered where they will have
a planned economic and employment base and where they can be efficiently serviced by local
and regional infrastructure including roads, public transport, water supply, sewerage,
drainage, energy, local parks, schools, shops, recreational facilities and other services. Any
substantial new development, whether a town expansion, or new settlement, should not
Statement of Planning Policy No. 3

1068 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 17 March 2006
consist exclusively of housing but must be planned as a sustainable community with a mix of
land uses including, employment, shops, open space, schools and other services. In the new
development areas, the aim should be to achieve increases in average housing density and
provide a range of housing types. Higher densities and mixed use development should be
encouraged near public transport nodes and activity centres.
Outside the metropolitan region and the regional growth centres, proposals for major new
settlements, whether by large scale additions to existing settlements or new free standing
settlements, are unlikely to prove to be a sustainable development option given the
difficulties in providing a secure employment base, the cost of providing the full range of new
services and infrastructure, and the potential for diverting population and resources from
existing settlements which could contribute to the decline of those settlements. New
settlements are only likely to prove to be a sustainable development option where they
address a significant shortfall of available housing land in the region, have a secure
employment base, are large enough to support a range of local services including schools,
shops and employment and there is no more sustainable alternative.
New settlements may be necessary to provide accommodation for mineral and resource
projects in remote locations. For existing settlements, the preference is to accommodate the
mining workforce in nearby communities, where the mine site is in reasonable proximity of
the town, and there is available housing land, infrastructure and facilities. In this way the
mining workforce will support the economy of the town and have access to the services and
facilities which the town provides. It is recognized, however, that it may not always be
practical to accommodate the mining workforce in existing communities. Regional and local
planning strategies need to find a balance between accommodating the mining workforce in
regional communities, and fly-in fly-out arrangements where necessary due to remoteness or
labour shortages. State and local governments also need to consider the standard of available
housing and access to education, health and recreation opportunities.
5.2 Managing urban growth and settlement across Western Australia
The State Planning Framework, which comprises the State Planning Strategy, regional and
subregional strategies and other policy statements, will provide the direction for the future
pattern of urban growth and settlement and the basis for decision making on urban
development proposals. The State Planning Framework provides the context for statutory
region schemes and local government schemes which must have regard to this framework in
their preparation.
Regional strategies are prepared by the Commission and cover a region or sub-region. These
generally have a planning horizon of 30 years. Regional strategies reflect and build on the
policies and proposals set out in the State Planning Strategy. Regional strategies should
provide clear guidance as to the future settlement pattern for the region and identify growth
areas taking into account population and housing need over the period of the strategy and be
consistent with the requirements of sustainable communities and development.
Settlements with growth potential should be identified in regional strategies having regard to
economic and employment opportunities, accessibility, provision of services and essential
infrastructure, and the capacity to accommodate growth whilst achieving good economic,
social and environmental outcomes. Planning will support the development of these
settlements to take advantage of the opportunities for growth.
The Metropolitan Development Program and Country Land Development Program
respectively comprise land release plans for Metropolitan Perth and the larger towns and
cities in the State. They provide clear guidance on urban land supply having regard to
population growth, housing demand, residential lot requirements, the provision of services
and infrastructure, capital works and programmes and financial arrangements. These land
release plans assist the orderly and efficient development of urban land in the metropolitan
region and in regional towns and cities by ensuring the timing of development is matched
with the provision of infrastructure and community services.
Local planning strategies are the main framework for planning at the local level enabling
local government to plan ahead. They express the strategic vision, policies and proposals of
the local government and reflect local needs and aspirations. They are also the key
instrument for translating State and regional plans and policies to the local level and provide
the rationale for the zonings and other provisions in local government town planning
schemes. Local strategies should reflect and build on the urban growth and settlement
policies set out in regional strategies and the land release plans and apply these at the more
detailed local level taking into account local needs and variations. Local strategies should
seek to identify sufficient land to meet future population and housing needs for at least a 10
year period.
In preparing local planning strategies, local governments should assess housing demand and
the type of additional housing for which they should plan. Local planning strategies should
secure an appropriate mix of housing types in the light of housing demand and the changing
composition of households. Local governments should adopt a systematic approach towards
identifying locations suitable for new housing development, redevelopment and infill and
opportunities for increased densities particularly around activity centres and close to public
transport nodes.
Statement of Planning Policy No. 3

17 March 2006 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 1069
The orderly planning of urban growth and settlement should be facilitated by structure plans,
which should take into account the strategic and physical context of the locality, provide for
the development of safe, convenient and attractive neighbourhoods which meet the diverse
needs of the community, and facilitate logical and timely provision of infrastructure and
services. Structure plans may consist of a hierarchy of plans ranging from broad district
structure plans to more detailed plans for neighbourhoods and precincts.
Proposals for future urban growth will be determined having regard to—
• the State Planning Strategy, relevant statements of planning policy, and regional and
subregional strategies in the State Planning Framework;
• population projections provided by the Department for Planning and Infrastructure;
• land release plans published by the Commission; and
• local planning strategies prepared by local government and endorsed by the Commission.
Speculative proposals for new urban subdivision and development in areas not identified in
regional and local planning strategies and land release plans will not generally be supported.
In order to properly consider and evaluate major urban growth proposals consistent with this
policy, the Commission may require proponents to provide a detailed assessment of the
performance of the project in meeting regional planning and sustainability objectives. These
will be based on an analysis of the consistency of the project with the regional planning
framework and the achievement of economic growth, social advancement and conservation of
environmental and natural resources. Key elements of the analysis will be the capacity to
provide jobs and employment, the capital investment required for infrastructure and services
(including contribution arrangements) and the overall costs and benefits of the proposal
taking into account all of its social, environmental and economic impacts (which may be
positive or negative). The methodology and data used in such analysis must be appropriate,
transparent and verifiable, and may be used as part of a consultation concerning the
proposal. Details of any established or proposed agreements or mechanisms underpinning
implementation of the proposal should also be set out.
5.3 Managing urban growth in Metropolitan Perth
While effective management of urban growth is important throughout the State, it is critical
for the sustainable future development of Metropolitan Perth.
Future metropolitan growth will be planned and managed in accordance with Network city.
Network city is the metropolitan strategy for Perth and Peel. It embodies the metropolitan
land use strategy, the metropolitan transport strategy, a whole-of-Government approach, a
commitment to partnerships with local governments and a commitment to plan with
communities.
The key elements are—
• consolidating residential development in existing areas and directing urban expansion
into the designated growth areas which are, or will be, well serviced by employment and
public transport;
• giving priority to infill development in established urban areas, particularly through
urban regeneration and intensification of development of under-utilised urban land,
whilst respecting neighbourhood character ;
• locating higher residential densities in locations accessible to transport and services, such
as in and around the CBD, regional and district centres, activity corridors and higher
education campuses, and in selected areas of high amenity on the coast and river
foreshores;
• concentrating commercial, health, education, entertainment and cultural developments
in and around activity centres and corridors with good access to public transport and
which are easily accessible for the catchment population;
• developing an integrated land use and transport network which reduces car dependence
and broadens travel options, makes it easier for people to use public transport or walk or
cycle to their destinations, and establishes defined transport corridors as the major
network for the movement of goods and people;
• protecting biodiversity and areas of environmental significance, and promoting the
concept of an interlinked system of regional and local open space; and
• protecting water resources, and reducing the use of non-renewable resources and waste
generation.
5.4 Planning for liveable neighbourhoods
The Commission’s Liveable Neighbourhoods policy intends that the neighbourhood should be
the basic building block for urban development with interconnected and integrated
neighbourhoods clustered into well defined towns and communities. New urban areas will be
comprehensively planned as sustainable communities which provide local facilities, services,
public transport and job opportunities within easy reach by walking or cycling, reducing
dependence on the private car for travel. In addition to meeting day to day needs,
neighbourhoods will be designed to build a strong sense of place and community by providing
Statement of Planning Policy No. 3

1070 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 17 March 2006
for a mix of housing types and households, creating the opportunity for social interaction and
designing at a human scale so that streets are attractive, convenient and safe public spaces.
The Liveable Neighbourhoods principles apply to the preparation and review of regional and
district structure plans for new growth areas, local structure plans for new subdivisions, and
in planning for the revitalisation or redevelopment of existing areas. These principles are—
• a sense of community and strong local identity and sense of place in neighbourhoods and
towns;
• an urban structure of walkable neighbourhoods clustered to form towns of compatibly
mixed uses in order to reduce car dependence for access to employment, retail and
community facilities;
• access generally by way of an interconnected network of streets which facilitate safe,
efficient and pleasant walking, cycling and driving;
• safe and convenient access to services and facilities designed for all users, including users
with disabilities;
• active street frontages with buildings facing streets to improve personal safety through
increased surveillance and activity;
• new development which supports the efficiency of public transport systems where
available, and provides safe, direct access to the system for residents;
• mixed use urban development which provides for a wide range of living, employment and
leisure opportunities capable of adapting over time as the community changes, and
reflects appropriate community standards of health, safety and amenity;
• a variety of lot sizes and housing types to cater for the diverse housing needs of the
community at a density that can ultimately support the provision of local services;
• subdivision and housing types which can adapt to changing needs and accommodate
gradual intensification;
• the protection of key environmental areas and the incorporation of significant cultural
and environmental features of a site into the design of an area;
• an integrated approach to the design of open space and urban water management; and
• cost-effective and resource-efficient development to promote affordable housing.
5.5 Coordination of services and infrastructure
Planning for new growth and settlements should be co-ordinated with the cost-efficient
provision of infrastructure and services such as roads, public transport, water supply,
sewerage, electricity, gas, elecommunications, drainage, open space, schools, health and
recreational facilities.
Regional and local strategies and plans should identify land required for future transport
routes, infrastructure, community services and facilities. Transport and other infrastructure
with off-site impacts should be separated from residential and other sensitive uses.
Infrastructure and service providers need to be consulted early in the process to ensure that
service delivery is co-ordinated with new development.
While there are clear costs in providing services on the urban fringe, there may also be
significant costs and long lead times in upgrading existing infrastructure capacity in existing
urban areas to serve higher densities. The construction of service infrastructure may also be
disruptive to local communities. Infrastructure providers will need to be consulted for advice
on the practicality, costs and funding of infrastructure services.
The Commission’s land release plans should be used to guide the programming of new
development on greenfield and major infill/redevelopment sites in the metropolitan region
and regional towns and cities to ensure the timely provision of infrastructure and services.
Developer contributions for infrastructure should be made in accordance with Commission
policy. In areas of fragmented land ownership, consideration should be given to cost-sharing
among owners to ensure the equitable funding of infrastructure.
Developer contributions should be consistent with the principles of need, nexus, equity and
accountability and should always take account of housing affordability.
Greenfield developments that leapfrog the existing urban front should be required to prefund
extensions to infrastructure, including extensions to major roads and utility networks, that
would otherwise be provided by service providers. There will, however, be scope for negotiated
agreements between developers and State and local government regarding funding of major
infrastructure for out-of-sequence development, particularly for land which is zoned for urban
development, and taking into account land supply and land assembly constraints.
Consideration may also need to be given to the need for contributions, which are necessary
and reasonable to fund public operational and maintenance costs arising from such
development.
5.6 Managing rural-residential growth
Rural-residential living is an important component of the settlement pattern in rural areas of
the State. Rural-residential development also provides for lifestyle choice and has the
potential to revitalise rural communities.
Statement of Planning Policy No. 3

17 March 2006 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 1071
Rural-residential development, however, can have a range of negative impacts. Hobby farms
and rural homesites can present potential conflicts with other land uses and rural resources
such as water catchments, basic raw materials, conservation areas and outstanding
landscapes. There are also pressures placed on State and local governments for services and
infrastructure which are difficult to provide economically because of the dispersed pattern of
subdivision. In the metropolitan region and around towns and cities in the regions, rural
living development can also limit opportunities for future urban development by fragmenting
land, and making land assembly and the provision of services more difficult and costly.
There is a need, therefore, to locate and design rural-residential settlements in a sustainable
way which is integrated with the overall pattern of settlement.
The Commission’s Statement of Planning Policy No.2.5: Agricultural and Rural Land Use
Planning applies to the zoning of land for rural-residential development. Planning for rural-
residential development should—
• avoid productive agricultural land, important natural resources, areas of high bush fire
risk or environmental sensitivity;
• avoid future urban areas or areas particularly suitable for urban development in terms of
their characteristics and proximity to urban services;
• give preference to locations near existing settlements with available services and
facilities in order to support the local community and avoid locations where services are
not available or costly extensions are necessary;
• minimise potential for conflict with incompatible activities associated with productive
rural uses or natural resource management;
• only include locations which are suitable for this type of development, such as land which
is topographically varied, visually attractive and with distinctive environmental
attributes or otherwise has potential for lifestyle pursuits; and
• take a realistic approach by allocating land based on forecast estimates of demand for
rural living not on the speculative development of land.
5.7 Planning for Aboriginal communities
Whilst many Aboriginal people live in closely settled rural or urban areas, there are many
who live in townships and settlements which are Aboriginal managed communities.
The Commission oversees the state-wide Planning for Aboriginal Communities project which
involves preparing community layout plans to guide the location of new houses and
community buildings for the larger, permanent and more remote Aboriginal communities.
The Commission’s Statement of Planning Policy No.3.2: Planning for Aboriginal Communities
provides the planning framework for the preparation of community layout plans and their
incorporation into town planning schemes.
In considering community living areas, proposals for new settlement will only be supported
where the proposed settlement—
• has an identified and sustainable drinking water source;
• is not subject to inundation from river or creek floodings;
• has a reasonable level of access to essential services including transport, health and
education; and
• the landholding is of a sufficient size to accommodate a living area and all associated
community infrastructure such as a water bore, sewerage ponds, rubbish tip and power
supply.
6. Implementation
Implementation of this policy will be through related statements of planning policy, regional
strategies, local planning strategies and regional and local planning schemes.
Implementation will also occur through the day-to-day process of decision-making on
rezoning, structure plans, subdivisions and development applications, and the actions of other
State agencies in carrying out their responsibilities.
State agencies and local government will need to take into account this policy to ensure
integrated decision making in planning for urban growth and settlement.
———————————
Statement of Planning Policy No. 3

!200600046gg!