70/2017
Planning Bulletin 70/2017
Caretakers’ dwellings in
industrial areas
January 2017
1. Purpose accommodation for a business Caretakers’ residences are addressed
owner and family. The cumulative by the Environmental Protection
This Planning Bulletin highlight’s
impact of such a shift can lead to (Noise) Regulations 1997. These
the issues associated with the
the establishment of a significant regulations do not classify such uses
establishment of caretakers’ dwellings
residential community in an industrial as “noise sensitive premises” as in the
in the State and to outline a policy for
area which has a number of social case of dwellings in residential areas
dealing consistently with this demand
and environmental implications. but do assign maximum allowable
through local planning strategies,
noise levels for these dwellings to
local planning schemes and policy Many local planning schemes now
ensure that a reasonable tolerable
provisions. Although the Bulletin has include provisions consistent with
noise environment is provided for the
been prepared largely in response to this planning bulletin. Some local
dwelling. This could place limits on
emerging regional issues where there governments prefer to prohibit the use
noise levels generated on an industrial
is a greater demand for caretakers’ in industrial areas particularly those
site and would apply not only to
dwellings, it can be equally applied of a general industrial nature, while
industrial activity on the site but
to the metropolitan region. However, others have requested inclusion as a
also to operations on neighbouring
the Western Australian Planning discretionary use usually with some
properties.
Commission (WAPC) acknowledges control on floor area in the scheme
the significant differences between or council policy as per this planning Community
metropolitan and regional local bulletin.
Residents in caretakers’ dwellings
government areas throughout the
have poor accessibility to both
State and the need to accommodate
2. Definition commercial and community services
a range of responses to this issue.
such as open space, education,
A “caretaker’s dwelling” is defined
Caretakers’ dwellings are included as health and cultural facilities.
in the model provisions in the
permissible uses in industrial zones
Planning and Development (Local The physical environment for
in many local planning schemes, but
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 residents is potentially unsafe and
in recent years have raised issues of
as a dwelling on the same site as unattractive and not conducive
land use conflict.
a building, operation or plant used to establishing a sense of
The establishment of residential for industry, and occupied by a neighbourhood and community.
communities in industrial areas is supervisor of that building, operation
Notwithstanding the above, there
contrary to the principles set out or plant.
is a strong demand for such
in the State Planning Framework
accommodation by industrial
and has the potential to both create
3. Background landowners from a financial and
an unacceptable environment
security point of view.
for residential living and impose The issues associated with a
constraints on the use of land for caretaker’s dwelling in industrial areas Restrictions on floor space can
industrial purposes. can be categorised as follows: prevent family units living on sites with
owner operated industries.
The traditional caretaker’s dwelling Environment
which provides limited residential Economy
accommodation as an incidental use Industrial activities are often
to a predominant industrial activity associated with more hazards and The financial viability of many small
can address genuine operational and higher risk levels than is acceptable scale operations can be increased
site security issues and has created for residential development. They by removing the need to purchase or
few problems in the past. have the potential to cause adverse rent residential premises elsewhere.
impacts on the amenity of residents This is particularly attractive in areas
The high price of land and shortage in such dwellings through emissions where residential land prices are high.
of residential accommodation in such as dust, odour and vibration. If caretakers’ dwellings are permitted,
many regional areas of the State Industrial risk is regulated under the this allows many small businesses to
has encouraged business operators Dangerous Goods Safety Act 2004 survive in more remote settlements
to live and work from the same and regulations by the Department of enabling a wider range of services to
premises. This has seen a shift from Mines and Petroleum. be provided to those communities
the limited accommodation concept than otherwise may be available.
to the provision of more substantial
1

Caretakers’ accommodation • Planning for a • Caretakers’ dwellings
reduces demand and pressure for range of residential should generally be
residential land in some of the centres accommodation to avoid prohibited in zones
particularly where there is limited shortages and high costs designed for general
supply and high demand from major which create demand industrial uses.
project development. for housing in industrial
• Caretakers’ dwellings
areas. This may include
Residential development in these may be an incidental
consideration of potential
areas can create a demand for use in industrial areas
sites for workforce
unplanned and unfunded residential accommodating light,
accommodation.
services and facilities. service or commercial
• Investigating the potential activity subject to specific
Infrastructure
for designation of provisions included in the
The operation and expansion of composite zones which scheme which emphasise
key infrastructure often sited in the can accommodate the incidental nature
vicinity of industrial areas such as residential and light of the dwelling to the
major ports, railways and service industrial uses on single predominant industrial
corridors can be restricted by such parcels of land. land use and limit the
development. floor area of the dwelling
• Designating strategic or
to not more than 100m2
Demand for additional provision of general industrial zones in accordance with the
physical and community infrastructure which accommodate model provisions set out
can be generated which poses a the larger and heavier below.
threat to sustainability of under industries, provide
resourced regional communities. adequate buffers to • The local government
handle the off-site may consider the use
impacts from adjoining of notifications on title
4. Objectives land uses such as to advise prospective
strategic industrial purchasers of potential
The objectives of this policy are:
buffers, port activities, impacts from noise, dust,
(a) To discourage the waste treatment plants odour or amenity that may
establishment of residential and prohibit caretakers’ arise from the location
uses in industrial areas which dwellings. of a caretaker’s dwelling
may compromise the integrity within the zone.
• Designating light industrial
of industrial areas and create
zones to accommodate Criteria for assessing such
unacceptable residential
the lighter and service applications with a view
environments.
industries where to mitigating any potential
(b) To provide for caretakers’ caretakers’ dwellings may impact from existing or
dwellings in industrial areas be permissible and the potential land uses in the
in limited circumstances relationship to the town vicinity should be developed
and subject to appropriate and cost of providing as a Local Planning Policy.
planning controls. services to residents in These criteria may include
the industrial areas is encouraging temporary
taken into account. rather than permanent
5. Recommended
accommodation structures,
policy measures and 5.2 Local Planning Schemes placing time limits on use
implementation and Local Planning Policies and the design and siting of
such dwellings.
In the preparation of local
5.1 Local Planning Strategies
planning schemes and
5.3 Model provisions for
scheme amendments the
There should be a general caretakers’ dwellings
following principles should
presumption against the
be applied: The purpose and intent of
establishment of caretakers’
the following provisions is to
dwellings in industrial • Caretakers’ dwellings
limit the scale of caretakers’
areas to avoid potential should be a prohibited
dwellings in industrial areas
conflict and associated use in zones which
to be incidental to the
environmental problems. are designed to
predominant industrial use.
accommodate strategic
Regional and Local
industry and industries of The provisions of this
Planning Strategies should
a noxious or hazardous clause are to apply for all
acknowledge where there
nature and zones which caretakers’ dwellings in the
is demand for caretakers’
are in proximity to existing Industrial zone:
dwellings and manage the
or proposed major
issue by:
infrastructure or other
potentially incompatible
uses.
2

(a) a caretaker’s dwelling
should be incidental to
the predominant industrial
use of the site.
(b) only one caretaker’s
dwelling is permitted on
a lot and that dwelling
should be on the same
lot as the associated
industrial use.
(c) a caretaker’s dwelling is
to have a total floor area
that does not exceed 100
square metres measured
from the external face of
walls; and
(d) open verandahs may be
permitted but must not be
enclosed by any means
unless the total floor area
remains within the 100
square metres referred to
in criteria (c).
(e) where the dominant
industrial use ceases
the right to occupy the
caretaker’s dwelling
expires.
.
Disclaimer © Western Australia Planning Commission website: www.planning.wa.gov.au
email: corporate@planning.wa.gov.au
This document has been published by the Western Australian Published by the
Planning Commission. Any representation, statement, Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 9000
opinion or advice expressed or implied in this publication is Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
made in good faith and on the basis that the government, its 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
employees and agents are not liable for any damage or loss Perth WA 6000 infoline: 1800 626 477
whatsoever which may occur as a result of action taken or not Locked Bag 2506 This document is available
taken, as the case may be, in respect of any representation, Perth WA 6001 in alternative formats on
statement, opinion or advice referred to herein. Professional application to Department of
Published January 2017
advice should be obtained before applying the information Planning Communication Services
contained in this document to particular circumstances. ISSN 1324-9142
3