Western Australia
Planning and Development Act 2005
Metropolitan Region Scheme
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au



Western Australia
Metropolitan Region Scheme
Contents
Part 1 — Preliminary
1. Citation 1
2. Application of Scheme 1
3. Contents of Scheme 1
4. Nature of Scheme 2
5. Purposes of Scheme 2
6. Aims of Scheme 3
7. Terms used 4
8. Heritage-protected places 5
Part 2 — Related policy instruments
Division 1 — Region planning scheme policies
9. Commission may prepare and resolve to approve
region planning scheme policy 7
10. Procedure for preparing and resolving to approve
region planning scheme policy 7
11. Procedure for amending region planning scheme
policy 9
12. Review of region planning scheme policy 10
13. Revocation of region planning scheme policy 10
Division 2 — District structure plans
14. Commission may prepare and resolve to approve
district structure plan 11
15. Procedure for preparing and resolving to approve
district structure plan 12
16. Procedure for amending district structure plan 14
17. Review of district structure plan 14
18. Revocation of district structure plan 14
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page i
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Contents
Part 3 — Reserved lands
19. Reserves 16
20. Purposes of reserves 16
Part 4 — Zones
21. Zones 18
22. Purposes of zones 18
23. Change of zone by resolution 19
Part 5 — Special control areas
24. Special control areas 21
Part 6 — Bush Forever areas
25. Bush Forever areas 22
Part 7 — Regional infrastructure
plan areas
26. Regional infrastructure plan areas 23
Part 8 — Development of land
27. Requirement for development approval 24
28. Commission may require development of zoned
land to have approval 25
29. Permitted development of reserved land 25
30. Use of reserved land by public authorities 28
31. Continued uses and non-conforming uses 28
32. Changes to non-conforming use 29
33. Part does not apply to particular developments 29
Part 9 — Applications for
development approval
34. Application under local planning scheme taken to
be application under Scheme 30
35. Applications under Scheme 30
36. Accompanying material 32
37. Action by local government on receipt of
application 33
38. Action by Commission on receipt of application 34
page ii Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Contents
39. Commission may request additional information or
material 34
40. Applicant may agree to or refuse request for
additional information or material 35
41. Advertising of applications 36
42. Refusal in relation to copyrighted material 37
Part 10 — Dealing with applications
for development approval
Division 1 — Considerations and consultation
43. Matters to be considered by Commission 38
44. Consultation with other authorities 40
45. Development of land affecting Swan and Canning
Rivers development control area 41
Division 2 — Determinations
46. Earliest Commission may determine application 43
47. Latest Commission must determine applications 44
48. Determination of applications 44
49. Form and date of determination 45
50. Term of development approval 45
51. Temporary development approval 45
52. Scope of development approval 46
53. Approval subject to later approval of details 46
54. Determination of applications in relation to zoned
land if power delegated to local government 47
55. Amending or cancelling development approval 47
Division 3 — Review
56. Review of determinations 48
Part 11 — Exemptions from planning
requirements for state of
emergency
57. Minister may issue notice of exemption from
planning requirements if state of emergency
declaration in force 50
58. Process for issuing notice under cl. 57 51
59. Coming into effect and cessation of notices and
exemptions under cl. 57 52
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page iii
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Contents
Part 12 — Administration
60. Compensation 54
61. Power to enter into agreements 54
62. Environmental conditions 54
63. Certificates 55
64. Approved forms must be published on website 55
Part 13 — Transitional provisions
65. Terms used 56
66. Existing lawful works 56
67. Existing development approvals 56
68. Existing applications for development approval:
applications with Commission 57
69. Existing applications for development approval:
applications with local government 57
70. Particular existing documents taken to be district
structure plans 58
71. Modified application of cl. 15 if plan adopted by
Commission during relevant period 58
72. Alternative procedure for approving district
structure plans during relevant period 59
73. References to parks and recreation and restricted
public access 59
Schedule 1
Notes
Compilation table 103
Defined terms
page iv Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Planning and Development Act 2005
Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 1 — Preliminary
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
1. Citation
This region planning scheme is the Metropolitan Region
Scheme.
[Clause 1 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
2. Application of Scheme
(1) This Scheme applies to all land in the metropolitan region.
(2) Subclause (1) applies subject to the Swan Valley Planning
Act 2020 section 9.
Note for this clause:
This Scheme and the Peel Region Scheme cover areas that are
contiguous. Some strategic planning documents such as the
Perth-Peel sub-regional strategy <Perth and Peel@3.5million>
apply to both scheme areas.
[Clause 2 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
3. Contents of Scheme
This Scheme comprises —
(a) the provisions of the Scheme; and
(b) the Scheme Map (sheets 1 to 38); and
(c) all other maps, plans, specifications and other particulars
contained in the Scheme.
[Clause 3 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 1
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 1 Preliminary
cl. 4
4. Nature of Scheme
(1) Although this Scheme and a local planning scheme may cover
the same area of land, this Scheme and the local planning
scheme have different roles in relation to development of the
land.
(2) This Scheme is focused on matters of State and regional
importance and guides overall planning and development in the
metropolitan region.
Note for this clause:
Under section 124(1) of the Act, if this Scheme is inconsistent with a
local planning scheme, this Scheme prevails over the local planning
scheme to the extent of the inconsistency.
[Clause 4 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
5. Purposes of Scheme
The purposes of this Scheme are to —
(a) reserve and protect land for regional transport,
infrastructure, conservation, recreation, cultural and
public purposes; and
(b) zone land for living, working and rural land uses; and
(c) provide a mechanism for certain development of
regional significance, and development in areas of
regional significance, to be considered and approved by
the Commission; and
(d) identify and protect land having strategic importance for
industrial and future urban use; and
(e) set out procedures for the assessment and determination
of applications for development approval under this
Scheme; and
(f) contribute to the implementation of the State’s planning
laws and policies by providing for assessment and
determination of applications for development approval
under this Scheme; and
page 2 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Preliminary Part 1
cl. 6
(g) provide for the strategic direction of planning and
development in the metropolitan region by allowing for
the making of particular planning instruments by the
Commission; and
(h) provide for the administration of this Scheme.
[Clause 5 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
6. Aims of Scheme
The aims of this Scheme are to —
(a) promote the sustainable development of land having
regard to relevant environmental, social, economic and
cultural factors; and
(b) provide for regional transportation, community services
and infrastructure in a way that is efficient, equitable and
timely; and
(c) protect as regional open space the metropolitan region’s
riverine and coastal foreshores and other areas of
regional conservation significance; and
(d) provide areas for regional recreational facilities; and
(e) protect surface water catchments and groundwater areas
for future water supplies; and
(f) protect areas of environmental significance; and
(g) provide for industrial development in planned estates
where land use conflicts and environmental impacts will
be minimised and efficient production facilitated; and
(h) provide for future urban development and prevent works
that may jeopardise that development; and
(i) protect strategic agricultural land considered to be of
State or regional importance; and
(j) protect strategic minerals and basic raw materials of
State and regional importance and provide for the
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 3
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 1 Preliminary
cl. 7
efficient and timely extraction of minerals and raw
materials and subsequent rehabilitation of affected land.
[Clause 6 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
7. Terms used
In this Scheme —
Bush Forever area means an area identified under clause 25(1);
commencement day means the day on which the Planning and
Development Amendment (Metropolitan Region Scheme)
Act 2024 section 5 comes into operation;
Commission website means a website maintained by or on
behalf of the Commission;
development approval under this Scheme means approval by
the Commission under Part 10;
district structure plan has the meaning given in clause 14(1);
heritage-protected place has the meaning given in clause 8;
local government means a local government of a district in the
metropolitan region;
non-conforming use means a use of land which, though lawful
immediately before commencement day, is not in conformity
with a provision of this Scheme;
owner, in relation to land, means —
(a) if the land is freehold land —
(i) a person whose name is registered as a proprietor
of the land; or
(ii) the State, if registered as a proprietor of the land;
or
(iii) a person who holds an interest as purchaser
under a contract to purchase an estate in fee
simple in the land; or
page 4 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Preliminary Part 1
cl. 8
(iv) a person who is the holder of a freehold interest
in land vested in an executor or administrator
under the Administration Act 1903 section 8;
and
(b) if the land is Crown land —
(i) the State; or
(ii) a person who holds an interest as purchaser
under a contract to purchase an estate in fee
simple in the land;
plan area, in relation to a district structure plan, means the area
of land covered by the plan;
region planning scheme policy has the meaning given in
clause 9(1);
reserved land means land reserved under this Scheme for a
public purpose;
Swan Canning development control area has the meaning
given in clause 45(1);
zoned land means land zoned under this Scheme.
[Clause 7 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
8. Heritage-protected places
(1) A heritage-protected place is a place —
(a) that is entered in the State Register of Heritage Places
under the Heritage Act 2018 section 42; or
(b) that is under consideration for entry into the State
Register of Heritage Places as described in
subclause (2); or
(c) that is the subject of an order under the Heritage
Act 2018 Part 4; or
(d) that is the subject of a heritage agreement that has been
certified under the Heritage Act 2018 section 90; or
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 5
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 1 Preliminary
cl. 8
(e) that is included on a heritage list established under the
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015 Schedule 2 clause 8(1) as that clause
has effect as part of a local planning scheme of a local
government; or
(f) that is within a heritage area designated under the
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015 Schedule 2 clause 9 as that clause has
effect as part of a local planning scheme of a local
government.
(2) For the purposes of subclause (1)(b), a place is under
consideration for entry into the State Register of Heritage Places
if —
(a) the Heritage Council has made a preliminary
determination under the Heritage Act 2018 section 39(2)
that the place warrants review under section 40(1) of
that Act but the review has not commenced; or
(b) the Heritage Council has commenced but has not
completed a review of the place under the Heritage
Act 2018 section 40(1); or
(c) the Heritage Council has made a recommendation under
the Heritage Act 2018 section 40(2) that the place be
entered in the State Register of Heritage Places but the
Minister for Heritage has not yet given a direction under
section 41(1) of that Act in relation to that
recommendation.
[Clause 8 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
page 6 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Related policy instruments Part 2
Region planning scheme policies Division 1
cl. 9
Part 2 — Related policy instruments
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
Division 1 — Region planning scheme policies
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
9. Commission may prepare and resolve to approve region
planning scheme policy
(1) The Commission may prepare and resolve to approve a policy (a
region planning scheme policy) in respect of any matter related
to the planning and development of the metropolitan region.
(2) A region planning scheme policy may apply —
(a) generally or in respect of a particular class or classes of
matter specified in the policy; and
(b) to the whole of the metropolitan region or to part or
parts of the region specified in the policy.
[Clause 9 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
10. Procedure for preparing and resolving to approve region
planning scheme policy
(1) Before resolving to approve a region planning scheme policy
the Commission must —
(a) prepare the proposed policy; and
(b) give the proposed policy to each local government in the
district of which the policy will apply and consult with
those local governments; and
(c) publish the proposed policy on the Commission website,
or another place chosen by resolution by the
Commission, for a period of at least 28 days or another
period chosen by resolution by the Commission; and
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 7
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 2 Related policy instruments
Division 1 Region planning scheme policies
cl. 10
(d) give notice on the Commission website of the
following —
(i) the manner and form in which submissions may
be made;
(ii) the period for making submissions and the last
day of that period;
(iii) any other matter in relation to the proposed
policy the Commission considers appropriate;
and
(e) give notice of the proposed policy in any other way and
carry out any other consultation the Commission
considers appropriate.
(2) The period mentioned in subclause (1)(d)(ii) must be the same
as the period for which the proposed policy is published under
subclause (1)(c).
(3) After the expiry of the period for making submissions, the
Commission —
(a) must consider all submissions made to the Commission
on the proposed policy —
(i) during the period for making submissions; and
(ii) in accordance with the requirements referred to
in subclause (1)(d)(i);
and
(b) may, if the Commission considers it appropriate to do
so, consider a submission —
(i) that is made during the period for making
submissions; but
(ii) that the Commission is not required to consider
under paragraph (a) because of paragraph (a)(ii);
and
(c) must review the proposed policy; and
page 8 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Related policy instruments Part 2
Region planning scheme policies Division 1
cl. 11
(d) must resolve to —
(i) approve the proposed policy without
modification; or
(ii) approve the proposed policy with modification,
whether or not the modification is as a result of a
submission; or
(iii) not approve the proposed policy.
(4) If the Commission resolves to approve the proposed policy, the
Commission must publish the policy as approved on the
Commission website.
(5) The region planning scheme policy takes effect on the day after
the day on which the policy is published under subclause (4).
[Clause 10 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
11. Procedure for amending region planning scheme policy
(1) The Commission may prepare and resolve to approve an
amendment to a region planning scheme policy —
(a) as if clause 10(1) to (3), with any necessary changes,
applied to the amendment; or
(b) in any other way the Commission considers appropriate.
(2) If the Commission resolves to approve an amendment to a
region planning scheme policy, the Commission must publish
the amendment as approved on the Commission website.
(3) An amendment to a region planning scheme policy takes effect
on the day after the day on which the amendment is published
under subclause (2).
(4) The Commission must maintain and publish on the Commission
website an up-to-date version of each region planning scheme
policy that is in force, consolidated to include any amendments
to the policy.
[Clause 11 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 9
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 2 Related policy instruments
Division 1 Region planning scheme policies
cl. 12
12. Review of region planning scheme policy
(1) The Commission must review the operation and effectiveness of
a region planning scheme policy that is in force within 6 months
after an anniversary referred to in subclause (2).
(2) The anniversaries are the 10th anniversary of the day on which
the region planning scheme policy first takes effect, the 20th
anniversary of that day, the 30th anniversary of that day and so
on.
[Clause 12 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
13. Revocation of region planning scheme policy
(1) A region planning scheme policy may be revoked —
(a) by a subsequent region planning scheme policy that —
(i) is prepared in accordance with this Division; and
(ii) expressly revokes the policy;
or
(b) by a notice of revocation —
(i) prepared by the Commission; and
(ii) published by the Commission on the
Commission website.
(2) A revocation under subclause (1)(b) does not take effect until
the notice of revocation has been published on the Commission
website for a period of 21 days.
[Clause 13 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
page 10 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Related policy instruments Part 2
District structure plans Division 2
cl. 14
Division 2 — District structure plans
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
14. Commission may prepare and resolve to approve district
structure plan
(1) The Commission may prepare and resolve to approve a plan (a
district structure plan) that deals broadly with major strategic
aspects of the coordination of future land uses and infrastructure
in respect of an area of land in the metropolitan region.
(2) A district structure plan may include —
(a) the key attributes and constraints of the plan area,
including the natural environment, landform and
topography of the plan area; and
(b) the planning context for —
(i) areas surrounding the plan area, including, for
example, whether surrounding areas are flood or
fire prone or contain an airport; and
(ii) the plan area; and
(iii) the metropolitan region;
and
(c) any major land uses, zoning or reserves proposed by the
plan; and
(d) the population impacts that are expected to result from
the implementation of the plan; and
(e) the extent to which the plan provides for the
coordination of key transport and other infrastructure;
and
(f) the proposed staging of the subdivision, if any, covered
by the plan; and
(g) other significant details in the plan area, including, for
example, major roads, drainage and infrastructure; and
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 11
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 2 Related policy instruments
Division 2 District structure plans
cl. 15
(h) any maps, information or other material considered
relevant by the Commission.
(3) A proposal in a district structure plan that land be zoned or
reserved as referred to in subclause (2)(c) does not operate to
zone or reserve the land.
[Clause 14 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
15. Procedure for preparing and resolving to approve district
structure plan
(1) Before resolving to approve a district structure plan the
Commission must —
(a) prepare the proposed plan; and
(b) give the proposed plan to each local government in the
district of which the plan will apply and consult with
those local governments; and
(c) publish the proposed plan on the Commission website
for a period of at least 42 days; and
(d) give notice on the Commission website of the
following —
(i) the manner and form in which submissions may
be made;
(ii) the period for making submissions and the last
day of that period;
(iii) any other matter in relation to the proposed plan
the Commission considers appropriate;
and
(e) give notice of the proposed plan in any other way and
carry out any other consultation the Commission
considers appropriate.
(2) The period mentioned in subclause (1)(d)(ii) must be the same
as the period for which the proposed plan is published on the
Commission website under subclause (1)(c).
page 12 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Related policy instruments Part 2
District structure plans Division 2
cl. 15
(3) After the expiry of the period for making submissions, the
Commission —
(a) must consider all submissions made to the Commission
on the proposed plan —
(i) during the period for making submissions; and
(ii) in accordance with the requirements referred to
in subclause (1)(d)(i);
and
(b) may, if the Commission considers it appropriate to do
so, consider a submission —
(i) that is made during the period for making
submissions; but
(ii) that the Commission is not required to consider
under paragraph (a) because of paragraph (a)(ii);
and
(c) must review the proposed plan; and
(d) must resolve to —
(i) approve the proposed plan without modification;
or
(ii) approve the proposed plan with modification,
whether or not the modification is as a result of a
submission; or
(iii) not approve the proposed plan.
(4) If the Commission resolves to approve the proposed plan, the
Commission must publish the plan as approved on the
Commission website.
(5) The district structure plan takes effect on the day after the day
on which the plan is published under subclause (4).
[Clause 15 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 13
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 2 Related policy instruments
Division 2 District structure plans
cl. 16
16. Procedure for amending district structure plan
(1) The Commission may prepare and resolve to approve an
amendment to a district structure plan —
(a) as if clause 15(1) to (3), with any necessary changes,
applied to the amendment; or
(b) in any other way the Commission considers appropriate.
(2) If the Commission resolves to approve an amendment to a
district structure plan, the Commission must publish the
amendment as approved on the Commission website.
(3) An amendment to a district structure plan takes effect on the day
after the day on which the amendment is published under
subclause (2).
(4) The Commission must maintain and publish on the Commission
website an up-to-date version of each district structure plan that
is in force, consolidated to include any amendments to the plan.
[Clause 16 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
17. Review of district structure plan
(1) The Commission must review the operation and effectiveness of
a district structure plan that is in force within 6 months after an
anniversary referred to in subclause (2).
(2) The anniversaries are the 10th anniversary of the day on which
the district structure plan first takes effect, the 20th anniversary
of that day, the 30th anniversary of that day and so on.
[Clause 17 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
18. Revocation of district structure plan
(1) A district structure plan may be revoked —
(a) by a subsequent district structure plan that —
(i) is prepared in accordance with this Division; and
(ii) expressly revokes the plan;
page 14 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Related policy instruments Part 2
District structure plans Division 2
cl. 18
or
(b) by a notice of revocation —
(i) prepared by the Commission; and
(ii) published by the Commission on the
Commission website.
(2) A revocation under subclause (1)(b) does not take effect until
the notice of revocation has been published on the Commission
website for a period of 21 days.
[Clause 18 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 15
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 3 Reserved lands
cl. 19
Part 3 — Reserved lands
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
19. Reserves
The lands shown as reserved lands on the Scheme Map are
reserved under this Scheme for the public purposes shown on
the Scheme Map.
[Clause 19 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
20. Purposes of reserves
Land is reserved under this Scheme for the following public
purposes —
(a) regional open space — to protect the natural
environment, provide recreational and cultural
opportunities, safeguard important landscapes and sites
of cultural or historical significance and provide for
public access;
(b) regional open space — restricted public access — to
protect the natural environment, provide recreational and
cultural opportunities, safeguard important landscapes
and sites of cultural or historical significance with
limited or no public access;
(c) primary regional roads — to provide a regional road
network to accommodate current and future transport
needs on roads declared under the Main Roads Act 1930;
(d) other regional roads — to provide a regional road
network to accommodate current and future transport
needs on roads for which the planning responsibilities
are shared between the Commission and local
government;
(e) railways — to provide for the passage of trains, the
marshalling, maintenance and storage of rolling stock,
and the conveying of the public and freight by rail;
page 16 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Reserved lands Part 3
cl. 20
(f) port installations — to provide for current and future
expansion needs;
(g) waterways — to recognise coastal and inland waterways
and lakes, provide for navigation in, and public access
to, those waterways and lakes where appropriate, and to
protect environmental, landscape and cultural values;
(h) water catchments — to protect water sources from
contamination;
(i) State forests — to recognise State forests;
(j) civic and cultural — to preserve and protect significant
civic precincts and buildings;
(k) public purposes — to provide for other public purposes
as denoted on the Scheme Map.
[Clause 20 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 17
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 4 Zones
cl. 21
Part 4 — Zones
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
21. Zones
(1) Parts of the metropolitan region are classified into the zones
shown on the Scheme Map.
(2) The zones are delineated and depicted on the Scheme Map
according to the legend on the Scheme Map.
[Clause 21 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
22. Purposes of zones
Land is classified into zones under this Scheme for the
following purposes —
(a) urban — to provide for residential development and
associated local employment, recreation and open space,
shopping, schools and other community facilities;
(b) urban deferred — to provide for land suitable for future
urban development but where there are various planning,
servicing and environmental requirements that need to
be addressed before urban development can take place;
(c) central city area — to provide for areas where
commercial, civic, cultural, residential, service and
administration serving the metropolitan region are
located;
(d) industrial — to provide for manufacturing industry, the
storage and distribution of goods and associated uses;
(e) special industrial — to provide for industry of State,
regional, or strategic importance;
(f) industrial deferred — to provide for land suitable for
future industrial development but where there are
various planning, servicing and environmental
requirements that need to be addressed before industrial
development can take place;
page 18 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Zones Part 4
cl. 23
(g) rural —
(i) to provide for the sustainable use of land for
agriculture; and
(ii) to assist in the conservation and wise use of
natural resources, including water, flora, fauna
and minerals; and
(iii) to provide a distinctive rural landscape setting for
urban areas; and
(iv) to accommodate carefully planned rural living
developments; and
(v) to accommodate tourism in keeping with rural
character, including, for example, farm stay
accommodation, breweries and wineries;
(h) rural — water protection — to control land use over
public groundwater supplies to avoid contamination;
(i) private recreation — to accommodate regionally
significant open space and recreational activities in
private use.
[Clause 22 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
23. Change of zone by resolution
(1) The Commission may by resolution transfer land —
(a) from the urban deferred zone to the urban zone; or
(b) from the industrial deferred zone to the industrial zone.
(2) A resolution under subclause (1) takes effect —
(a) on the day (publication day) on which notification of the
resolution is published in the Gazette; or
(b) on a day after publication day that is specified in the
resolution.
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 19
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 4 Zones
cl. 23
(3) A transfer of land under this clause must be reflected on the
Scheme Map from the day the resolution to transfer the land
takes effect.
[Clause 23 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
page 20 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Special control areas Part 5
cl. 24
Part 5 — Special control areas
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
24. Special control areas
(1) Special control areas are marked on the Scheme Map according
to the legend on the Scheme Map.
(2) The purpose, objectives and additional provisions that apply to
each special control area are set out in the Table.
Table
Special control areas in Scheme area
Name of Additional
Purpose Objectives
area provisions
(3) The provisions of this Part applying to the special control areas
apply in addition to the provisions of this Scheme applying to
any underlying zone or reserve and any general provision of the
Scheme.
Note for this clause:
On commencement day there are no special control areas on the
Scheme Map. This clause will be amended as special control areas are
established.
[Clause 24 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 21
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 6 Bush Forever areas
cl. 25
Part 6 — Bush Forever areas
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
25. Bush Forever areas
(1) Land is identified as a Bush Forever area in the manner
described in column 1 of the Table.
Table
Bush Forever area in Scheme area
Column 1 Column 2
Legend on Scheme map Area
All land hatched Bush Forever area
(2) The identification of an area as a Bush Forever area —
(a) operates in addition to —
(i) the provisions of this Scheme applying to any
underlying zone or reserve; and
(ii) any general provisions of this Scheme;
and
(b) does not operate to zone or reserve that area.
[Clause 25 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
page 22 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Regional infrastructure plan areas Part 7
cl. 26
Part 7 — Regional infrastructure plan areas
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
26. Regional infrastructure plan areas
(1) Regional infrastructure plan areas are marked on the Scheme
Map according to the legend on the Scheme Map.
(2) The purpose, objectives and additional provisions that apply to
each regional infrastructure plan area are set out in the Table.
Table
Regional infrastructure plan areas in Scheme area
Name of Additional
Purpose Objectives
area provisions
(3) The provisions of this Part applying to regional infrastructure
plan areas apply in addition to the provisions of this Scheme
applying to any underlying zone or reserve and any general
provision of the Scheme.
Note for this clause:
On commencement day there are no regional infrastructure plan areas
on the Scheme Map. This clause will be amended as regional
infrastructure plan areas are established.
[Clause 26 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 23
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 8 Development of land
cl. 27
Part 8 — Development of land
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
27. Requirement for development approval
(1) A person must not commence or carry out development of —
(a) reserved land; or
(b) zoned land specified in a resolution by the Commission
under clause 28(1); or
(c) zoned land that is —
(i) land comprised in a lot any part of which (but not
all of which) is within the Swan Canning
development control area; or
(ii) land (including water) that abuts the Swan
Canning development control area;
or
(d) land for which Part 5 states development approval under
this Scheme must be obtained.
(2) Subclause (1) does not apply if the person has obtained
development approval under this Scheme for the development.
(3) Also, subclause (1)(a) and (b) do not apply if this Part provides
that the development does not require development approval
under this Scheme.
Notes for this clause:
1. Planning approval for development in a planning control area must be
obtained under the Planning and Development Act 2005 Part 7.
2. Other approval to commence or carry out development may be
required by a local planning scheme or other instrument.
[Clause 27 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
page 24 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Development of land Part 8
cl. 28
28. Commission may require development of zoned land to have
approval
(1) The Commission may by resolution require development of
zoned land to have development approval under this Scheme
before it is commenced or carried out.
(2) The resolution may be made so as to apply to —
(a) all land, or a specified area of land, zoned under this
Scheme; or
(b) all development or classes of development or a specified
development or class of development of land zoned
under this Scheme.
(3) Notice of the resolution must, as soon as practicable after it is
made, be —
(a) published in the Gazette; and
(b) served on each local government.
[Clause 28 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
29. Permitted development of reserved land
(1) The following development of reserved land does not require
development approval under this Scheme —
(a) the erection, construction, maintenance, improvement or
alteration of a boundary fence or wall or other means of
boundary enclosure;
(b) building or work that affects only the interior of a
building and does not materially affect the external
appearance of the building;
(c) the demolition of a building or structure;
(d) the erection of a sign that —
(i) relates to the functions of a public authority or
local government (other than signs of a
promotional nature) and is constructed or
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 25
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 8 Development of land
cl. 29
exhibited by, or on behalf of, the public authority
or local government; or
(ii) is required for the management or control of
traffic on a public road, carpark, cycleway,
railway or waterway and is constructed or
exhibited by or on behalf of a public authority or
local government; or
(iii) is required to be exhibited under a written law;
(e) the erection, construction, maintenance, improvement or
alteration of a jetty or associated structure (including a
boat lifting device or mooring pile) within an artificial
waterway except if the jetty or associated structure —
(i) does not comply with a policy in regard to such
structures that is adopted by the relevant local
government; or
(ii) is situated on a regionally significant waterway
identified by resolution of the Commission for
the purposes of this provision;
(f) works on reserved land owned by or vested in a public
authority that are —
(i) works on land reserved for primary regional
roads or other regional roads for the purpose of
or in connection with a road as defined in the
Main Roads Act 1930 section 6; or
(ii) works on land reserved for port installations for
the purpose of or in connection with a port; or
(iii) works for the purpose of, or in connection with,
the supply of water or wastewater services,
electricity or gas, the drainage of surplus water or
the treatment of water, wastewater or surplus
water; or
(iv) works on land reserved for railways, primary
regional roads or other regional roads for the
purpose of or in connection with a railway, other
page 26 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Development of land Part 8
cl. 29
than the construction or alteration of a railway
station or any related carparks, public transport
interchange facilities or associated means of
pedestrian or vehicular access; or
(v) works on reserved land if the works are in
accordance with a management plan endorsed by
the Commission; or
(vi) works on land reserved for public purposes —
high school for the purpose of or incidental to a
high school; or
(vii) operational works on land reserved for State
forests for the purpose of or incidental to a State
forest; or
(viii) works that a public authority is expressly
authorised under an Act to commence or carry
out without the approval of the Commission;
(g) development that the Commission by resolution, notice
of which is published in the Gazette, declares to be
development that does not require development approval
under this Scheme.
(2) In subclause (1) —
reserved land owned by or vested in a public authority includes
reserved land in relation to which a public authority has an
easement, right of way, right of occupation or any other interest,
right, privilege or concession.
(3) Subclause (1)(a), (d), (e) and (g) apply regardless of whether the
land is located in a heritage-protected place.
(4) Subclause (1)(b), (c) and (f)(i) to (vii) do not apply if the land is
located in a heritage-protected place.
(5) Subclause (1)(g) does not apply to development of —
(a) land comprised in a lot any part of which (but not all of
which) is within the Swan Canning development control
area; or
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 27
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 8 Development of land
cl. 30
(b) land (including water) that abuts the Swan Canning
development control area.
(6) Subclause (1) does not authorise development of land that
involves —
(a) the clearing of native vegetation in a Bush Forever area;
or
(b) direct drainage into a Bush Forever area.
[Clause 29 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
30. Use of reserved land by public authorities
(1) Without limiting clause 29, reserved land may be used by a
public authority without development approval under this
Scheme if the land is used —
(a) for the purpose for which it is reserved under this
Scheme; or
(b) for any purpose for which the land may be lawfully used
by the public authority.
(2) Subclause (1) does not authorise use of land that involves —
(a) the clearing of native vegetation in a Bush Forever area;
or
(b) direct drainage into a Bush Forever area.
[Clause 30 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
31. Continued uses and non-conforming uses
(1) This Scheme does not prevent the continued use of any land, or
any structure or building on land, for the purpose for which it
was being lawfully used immediately before commencement
day.
(2) Subclause (1) does not apply if —
(a) the use of land is a non-conforming use; and
(b) the non-conforming use of the land is discontinued; and
page 28 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Development of land Part 8
cl. 32
(c) a period of 6 months, or a longer period approved by the
Commission, has elapsed since the discontinuation of
the non-conforming use.
(3) Also, subclause (1) does not apply in respect of a
non-conforming use of land if, under Part 11 of the Act, the
Commission —
(a) purchases the land; or
(b) pays compensation to the owner of the land in relation to
the non-conforming use.
[Clause 31 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
32. Changes to non-conforming use
Development approval under this Scheme is required to —
(a) alter or extend a non-conforming use of land; or
(b) erect, alter or extend a building used for, or in
conjunction with, a non-conforming use; or
(c) repair, rebuild, alter or extend a building used for a
non-conforming use that is destroyed to the extent of
75% or more of its value; or
(d) change the use of land from a non-conforming use to
another non-conforming use.
[Clause 32 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
33. Part does not apply to particular developments
This Part does not apply to a development to which the Swan
and Canning Rivers Management Act 2006 Part 5 applies.
[Clause 33 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 29
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 9 Applications for development approval
cl. 34
Part 9 — Applications for development approval
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
34. Application under local planning scheme taken to be
application under Scheme
(1) This clause applies if —
(a) an application to a local government for approval for
development of land in the metropolitan area under a
local planning scheme is accepted by the local
government; and
(b) development approval under this Scheme is required for
development of the land.
(2) The application is taken to also be an application for
development approval under this Scheme of the development.
[Clause 34 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
35. Applications under Scheme
(1) This clause applies if —
(a) approval under a local planning scheme of development
of land in the metropolitan region is not required; but
(b) development approval under this Scheme is required for
development of the land.
(2) An application for development approval under this Scheme of
the development must be lodged with the local government in
the district of which the land is situated.
(3) An application made under subclause (2) must be —
(a) made in the form approved by the Commission; and
(b) signed by the owner of the land on which the
development is proposed; and
(c) accompanied by any plans and other information
required under clause 36.
page 30 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Applications for development approval Part 9
cl. 35
(4) For the purposes of subclause (3)(b), a person or body may sign
an application for development approval under this Scheme as
the owner of freehold land if the person or body is 1 of the
following —
(a) a person who is referred to in paragraph (a) of the
definition of owner in clause 7;
(b) a strata company that —
(i) is authorised to make an application for
development approval in respect of the land
under scheme by-laws registered under the Strata
Titles Act 1985; and
(ii) if the land is held under a leasehold scheme, has
the written consent of the owner of the leasehold
scheme to make the application;
(c) a community corporation for a community titles scheme
that is authorised to make an application for
development approval in respect of the land under
scheme by-laws registered for the community titles
scheme under the Community Titles Act 2018;
(d) a person who is authorised under another written law to
make an application for development approval in respect
of the land;
(e) an agent of a person referred to in paragraph (a).
Note:
The Planning and Development Act 2005 section 267A makes
provision for the signing of documents by the owner of Crown land or
freehold land in the name of the State.
(5) If a term used in subclause (4)(b) is given a meaning in the
Strata Titles Act 1985 section 3(1), it has the same meaning in
subclause (4)(b).
(6) If a term used in subclause (4)(c) is given a meaning in the
Community Titles Act 2018 section 3(1), it has the same
meaning in subclause (4)(c).
[Clause 35 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 31
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 9 Applications for development approval
cl. 36
36. Accompanying material
Unless the Commission waives any particular requirement, an
application for development approval under clause 35(2) must
be accompanied by —
(a) a plan or plans to a scale of not less than 1:500
showing —
(i) the location of the site, including street names,
lot numbers, north point and the dimensions of
the site; and
(ii) the existing and proposed ground levels over the
whole of the land that is the subject of the
application; and
(iii) the location, height and type of all existing
structures on the land that is the subject of the
application, and all existing structures and
vegetation proposed to be removed; and
(iv) the existing and proposed use of the site,
including proposed hours of operation, and
buildings and structures to be erected on the site;
and
(v) the existing and proposed means of access for
pedestrians and vehicles to and from the site; and
(vi) the location, number, dimensions and layout of
all carparks intended to be provided; and
(vii) the location and dimensions of any area proposed
to be provided for the loading and unloading of
vehicles carrying goods and commodities to and
from the site and the means of access to and from
those areas; and
(viii) the location, dimensions and design of any open
storage or trade display area, and particulars of
the manner in which it is proposed to develop
those areas; and
page 32 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Applications for development approval Part 9
cl. 37
(ix) the nature and extent of any open space and
landscaping proposed for the site;
and
(b) plans, elevations and sections of any building proposed
to be erected or altered and of any building it is intended
to retain; and
(c) any specialist studies the Commission may require the
applicant to undertake in support of the application,
including, for example, traffic, heritage, environmental,
engineering or urban design studies; and
(d) any other plan or information relating to the proposed
development that the Commission may reasonably
require.
[Clause 36 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
37. Action by local government on receipt of application
(1) This clause applies if —
(a) a local government receives an application to which
clause 34 applies or under clause 35; and
(b) the local government is not empowered to determine the
application under this Scheme under powers delegated
to the local government by the Commission.
(2) The local government must forward a copy of the application
and accompanying material to the Commission within 7 days of
the local government becoming aware that it is not empowered
to determine the application.
(3) Within 42 days of receiving the application, or such longer
period as the Commission allows, the local government may
make recommendations to the Commission regarding the
application.
[Clause 37 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 33
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 9 Applications for development approval
cl. 38
38. Action by Commission on receipt of application
(1) On receipt under clause 37(2) of an application for development
approval under this Scheme, the Commission must —
(a) consider whether the application and accompanying
material satisfies clauses 34 to 36, as the case requires;
and
(b) within 7 days after the day on which the application is
received, give the applicant written notice stating —
(i) if the Commission is satisfied that the application
and accompanying material satisfies clauses 34
to 36, as the case requires — that the application
has been accepted for assessment; or
(ii) otherwise — that the applicant must amend the
application, or provide further accompanying
material, before the application can be accepted
for assessment.
(2) If the Commission does not give notice under subclause (1)(b)
within the 7-day period referred to in that subclause, the
application is taken to be accepted for assessment on the day
after the end of that period.
(3) If the Commission gives notice under subclause (1)(b)(ii) and
the applicant amends the application or provides further
accompanying material as required, this clause applies again in
respect of the application as amended or as accompanied by the
further material as if a reference to the receipt of the application
were a reference to the receipt of the amendment or the further
material.
[Clause 38 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
39. Commission may request additional information or material
(1) If an application for development approval under this Scheme
has been accepted for assessment, the Commission may, by
written notice given to the applicant, request the applicant to
page 34 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Applications for development approval Part 9
cl. 40
provide any further information or material that the Commission
reasonably requires to determine the application.
(2) A request under subclause (1) may be made whether or not the
Commission gave the applicant notice under clause 38(1)(b)(ii)
in relation to the application before it was accepted for
assessment.
(3) A request under subclause (1) must state the period within
which the further information or material must be provided,
which must be a period of at least 21 days after the day on
which the request is made.
[Clause 39 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
40. Applicant may agree to or refuse request for additional
information or material
(1) If a request under clause 39(1) is made to an applicant for
development approval under this Scheme, the applicant may, by
written notice given to the Commission within 7 days after the
day on which the request is made, agree to or refuse the request.
(2) If the applicant does not agree to or refuse the request within the
7-day period referred to in subclause (1), the applicant is taken
to have refused the request.
(3) If an applicant agrees to a request under clause 39(1), the period
set out in subclause (4) is not to be counted for the purposes of
determining when the application for development approval
must be determined under clause 47.
(4) For the purposes of subclause (3), the period —
(a) begins on the day on which the applicant agrees to the
request; and
(b) ends on the earlier of the following —
(i) the day on which the applicant gives the
information or material specified in the request to
the Commission;
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 35
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 9 Applications for development approval
cl. 41
(ii) the last day of the period stated in the notice of
request under clause 39(3).
(5) If an applicant refuses a request under clause 39(1) —
(a) the Commission must not refuse to determine the
application for development approval merely because
the applicant has refused the request; and
(b) the making of the request does not affect when the
application for development approval must be
determined under clause 47.
[Clause 40 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
41. Advertising of applications
(1) If the Commission is of the opinion that notice of an application
for development approval under this Scheme should be given
before a determination is made regarding development approval,
the Commission may require the applicant to give notice of the
application in 1 or more of the following ways —
(a) notice of the proposed development of land served on
nearby owners and occupiers who, in the opinion of the
Commission, are likely to be affected by the proposed
development, stating that submissions may be made to
the Commission by a day specified in the notice, being
not less than 14 days from the day the notice is served;
(b) notice of the proposed development published in a
newspaper circulating in the metropolitan region stating
that submissions may be made to the Commission by a
day specified in the notice, being not less than 14 days
from the day the notice is published;
(c) a sign or signs displaying notice of the proposed
development erected in a conspicuous position on the
land on which development is proposed for a period of
not less than 14 days from the day the notice is erected.
page 36 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Applications for development approval Part 9
cl. 42
(2) The notice referred to in subclause (1) is to be in the form
approved by the Commission with any modifications considered
appropriate by the Commission.
(3) The Commission must publish the application for development
approval referred to in the notice and the material
accompanying the application on the Commission website.
[Clause 41 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
42. Refusal in relation to copyrighted material
The Commission may refuse to accept an application for
development approval under this Scheme if the Commission is
not satisfied that there is in place an agreement for the
Commission to use any copyrighted material provided in
support of the application —
(a) for the purpose of advertising the application; and
(b) for zero remuneration.
[Clause 42 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 37
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 10 Dealing with applications for development approval
Division 1 Considerations and consultation
cl. 43
Part 10 — Dealing with applications for development
approval
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
Division 1 — Considerations and consultation
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
43. Matters to be considered by Commission
When considering an application for development approval
under this Scheme the Commission must have regard to the
following matters if, and to the extent, they are of State or
regional importance —
(a) the purposes and aims of this Scheme and any relevant
local planning schemes in operation within the
metropolitan region;
(b) the requirements of orderly and proper planning,
including —
(i) any relevant proposed amendment to this
Scheme or proposed replacement Scheme for
which advertising has commenced under
section 43 of the Act; or
(ii) any relevant proposed local planning scheme or
proposed amendment to a local planning scheme
for which advertising has commenced under
section 84 of the Act;
(c) any State planning policy;
(d) any environmental protection policy approved under the
EP Act;
(e) any policy or strategy of the Commission, including any
region planning scheme policy or district structure plan
that is in force;
(f) any policy adopted by the Government;
page 38 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Dealing with applications for development approval Part 10
Considerations and consultation Division 1
cl. 43
(g) the local government’s local planning strategy in respect
of a local planning scheme, as endorsed by the
Commission under the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
regulation 15(1) and amended from time to time;
(h) for reserved land, the public purpose for which the land
is reserved;
(i) the conservation of any place that is a heritage-protected
place;
(j) the compatibility of the development with its setting;
(k) any social issues that may affect the amenity of the
locality;
(l) the cultural significance of any place or area affected by
the development;
(m) the likely effect of the proposal on the natural
environment and any means that are proposed to protect,
or to mitigate impacts on, the natural environment;
(n) whether the land to which the application relates is
unsuitable for the proposal because it is, or is likely to
be, subject to flooding, tidal inundation, subsidence,
landslip, bush fire or other similar risk;
(o) the preservation of the amenity of the locality;
(p) the relationship of the proposal to development of
adjoining land or on other land in the locality, including,
but not limited to, the likely effect of the height, bulk,
scale, orientation and appearance of the proposal;
(q) whether the proposed means of access to and egress
from the site are adequate and whether adequate
provision has been made for the loading, unloading,
manoeuvring and parking of vehicles;
(r) the amount of traffic likely to be generated by the
proposal, particularly in relation to the capacity of the
road system in the locality and the probable effect on
traffic flow and safety;
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 39
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 10 Dealing with applications for development approval
Division 1 Considerations and consultation
cl. 44
(s) whether public transport services are necessary and, if
so, whether they are available and adequate for the
proposal;
(t) whether public utility services are available and
adequate for the proposal;
(u) whether adequate provision has been made for access for
pedestrians and cyclists (including end of trip storage,
toilet and shower facilities);
(v) whether adequate provision has been made for access by
disabled persons;
(w) whether adequate provision has been made for the
landscaping of the land to which the application relates
and whether any trees or other vegetation on the land
should be preserved;
(x) whether the proposal is likely to cause soil erosion or
land degradation;
(y) the potential loss of any community service or benefit
resulting from the development approval;
(z) any relevant submissions received on the application;
(za) any recommendations received from a local government
under clause 37(3);
(zb) consultation under clause 44(1);
(zc) any advice of the Trust under clause 45(4);
(zd) any other development consideration the Commission
considers relevant.
[Clause 43 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
44. Consultation with other authorities
(1) The Commission may consult on the proposed development of
land with any public authority the Commission considers
appropriate.
page 40 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Dealing with applications for development approval Part 10
Considerations and consultation Division 1
cl. 45
(2) The Commission must not determine an application for
development approval under this Scheme in respect of land
reserved under this Scheme without first consulting each
relevant public authority for the land.
(3) In subclause (2) —
relevant public authority, for land reserved under this Scheme,
means a public authority —
(a) for which the land is reserved; or
(b) that owns or manages the land.
[Clause 44 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
45. Development of land affecting Swan and Canning Rivers
development control area
(1) In this clause —
SCRM Minister means the Minister to whom the administration
of the Swan and Canning Rivers Management Act 2006 is
committed;
Swan Canning development control area means the
development control area as defined in the Swan and Canning
Rivers Management Act 2006 section 3(1);
Trust means the Swan River Trust established by the Swan and
Canning Rivers Management Act 2006 section 16(1).
(2) This clause applies if an application for development approval
under this Scheme relates to —
(a) development of land comprised in a lot —
(i) any part of which (but not all of which) is within
the Swan Canning development control area; or
(ii) that is not in the Swan Canning development
control area but abuts waters that are in the Swan
Canning development control area;
or
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 41
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 10 Dealing with applications for development approval
Division 1 Considerations and consultation
cl. 45
(b) development of land, other than development to which
paragraph (a) applies —
(i) that abuts the Swan Canning development
control area; or
(ii) that in the opinion of the Commission is likely to
affect waters in the Swan Canning development
control area.
(3) Subject to subclause (9), the Commission must give full
particulars of the application to the Trust.
(4) The Trust, within 42 days after the day on which it receives
particulars of the application, or within such longer period as the
Commission allows, must give the Commission its advice in
writing on —
(a) how the application should be determined; and
(b) any conditions to which any approval of the application
should be made subject.
(5) If the Trust fails to give its advice within the time allowed under
subclause (4), it is taken to have no advice to give on the
application.
(6) Subject to any direction under subclause (7)(b), the Commission
must determine an application referred to in subclause (2)(a) in
a manner that is consistent with the advice of the Trust on the
application.
(7) If the Commission does not agree with all or part of the advice
of the Trust on an application referred to in subclause (2)(a) —
(a) the matter on which there is not agreement is to be
resolved in the manner determined by the SCRM
Minister and the Minister; and
(b) the Minister must direct the Commission accordingly;
and
page 42 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Dealing with applications for development approval Part 10
Determinations Division 2
cl. 46
(c) the Commission must determine the application in
accordance with the direction.
(8) The Commission must have regard to the advice of the Trust
when determining an application referred to in subclause (2)(b)
but is not required to make a determination that is consistent
with that advice.
(9) The Trust —
(a) may determine that a particular class or description of
application need not be referred to it for advice under
this clause; and
(b) must notify the Commission of any such determination.
[Clause 45 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
Division 2 — Determinations
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
46. Earliest Commission may determine application
The Commission must not determine an application for
development approval under this Scheme before —
(a) the earlier of —
(i) the expiry of the period referred to in
clause 37(3) within which the local government
may make recommendations about the
application; or
(ii) receiving recommendations from the local
government under clause 37(3);
and
(b) the expiry of the following periods in respect of notice
of the proposed development of land —
(i) any period specified for the purposes of
clause 41(1)(a) or (b);
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 43
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 10 Dealing with applications for development approval
Division 2 Determinations
cl. 47
(ii) any period referred to in clause 41(1)(c) for the
purposes of that paragraph.
[Clause 46 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
47. Latest Commission must determine applications
(1) Subject to clause 46, the Commission must determine an
application for development approval under this Scheme —
(a) if the application is the subject of a notice under
clause 41 — within 90 days after the day on which the
application is accepted for assessment; or
(b) otherwise — within 60 days after the day on which the
application is accepted for assessment; or
(c) in either case — within a longer period agreed in writing
between the applicant and the Commission.
(2) If the Commission has not made a determination in the period
referred to in subclause (1), the Commission is taken to have
refused to grant the development approval.
(3) Despite subclause (2), the Commission may determine whether
or not to grant the development approval after the period
applicable under subclause (1) has expired and the validity of
the determination is not affected by the expiry.
[Clause 47 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
48. Determination of applications
In determining an application for development approval under
this Scheme the Commission may —
(a) grant development approval with or without conditions;
or
(b) refuse to grant development approval.
[Clause 48 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
page 44 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Dealing with applications for development approval Part 10
Determinations Division 2
cl. 49
49. Form and date of determination
(1) As soon as practicable after determining an application, the
Commission must give notice of the determination to the
applicant in the form approved by the Commission.
(2) The date of the determination is the date specified in the notice.
(3) If development approval under this Scheme is refused the
Commission must give reasons for its refusal.
[Clause 49 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
50. Term of development approval
If development approval under this Scheme is granted —
(a) the development of the land must be substantially
commenced —
(i) if no period is specified in the approval — within
the period of 2 years commencing on the date of
the determination; or
(ii) if a period is specified in the approval — within
that period; or
(iii) in either case — within a longer period approved
by the Commission on an application made under
clause 55(1)(a);
and
(b) the approval lapses if the development has not
substantially commenced within the period determined
under paragraph (a).
[Clause 50 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
51. Temporary development approval
The Commission may impose conditions limiting the period of
time for which development approval under this Scheme is
granted.
[Clause 51 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 45
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 10 Dealing with applications for development approval
Division 2 Determinations
cl. 52
52. Scope of development approval
Development approval under this Scheme may be granted —
(a) for the entire development of the land; or
(b) for development of the land except for a specified part or
aspect of that development; or
(c) only for a specified part or aspect of the development of
the land.
[Clause 52 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
53. Approval subject to later approval of details
(1) If an application for development approval under this Scheme is
for development of land that includes building or works,
development approval may be granted subject to matters
requiring subsequent development approval, including, for
example —
(a) the siting, design and external appearance of the
buildings; and
(b) means of access; and
(c) landscaping; and
(d) any other matters the Commission considers appropriate.
(2) The Commission may require such further details as it considers
appropriate before considering an application for subsequent
development approval.
(3) An application for subsequent development approval must be
made not later than 2 years after the date of the determination of
the first approval, or such other period as is specified in the first
approval.
[Clause 53 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
page 46 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Dealing with applications for development approval Part 10
Determinations Division 2
cl. 54
54. Determination of applications in relation to zoned land if
power delegated to local government
(1) This clause applies if —
(a) a determination is made by a local government under a
local planning scheme in respect of approval for
development of land to which a requirement under
clause 28 applies; and
(b) the local government is empowered, under a delegation
by the Commission, to determine the application for
development approval under this Scheme taken to have
been made under clause 34.
(2) Subject to subclause (3) and despite any other provision of this
Scheme, the local government is taken to have made, at the
same time as the determination under the local planning scheme
was made, the same determination under this Scheme in respect
of the development.
(3) Nothing in this clause prevents the Commission from exercising
its power to determine an application for development approval
in accordance with the terms of the delegation referred to in
subclause (1)(b).
[Clause 54 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
55. Amending or cancelling development approval
(1) An owner of land in respect of which development approval
under this Scheme has been granted may make an application to
the Commission requesting the Commission to do any or all of
the following —
(a) to amend the approval so as to extend the period within
which any development approval must be substantially
commenced;
(b) to amend or delete any condition to which the approval
is subject;
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 47
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 10 Dealing with applications for development approval
Division 3 Review
cl. 56
(c) to amend an aspect of the development approval which,
if amended, would not substantially change the
development approved;
(d) to cancel the approval.
(2) An application under subclause (1) —
(a) must be made in accordance with the requirements of
Part 9 and dealt with under this Part as if it were an
application for development approval; and
(b) may be made during or after the period within which the
development approved must be substantially
commenced.
(3) Despite subclause (2), the Commission may waive or vary a
requirement in Part 9 or this Part in respect of an application if
the Commission is satisfied that the application relates to a
minor amendment to the development approval.
(4) The Commission may determine an application made under
subclause (1) by —
(a) approving the application without conditions; or
(b) approving the application with conditions; or
(c) refusing the application.
[Clause 55 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
Division 3 — Review
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
56. Review of determinations
(1) In this clause —
affected person, in relation to a reviewable determination,
means —
(a) the applicant for development approval under this
Scheme; or
page 48 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Dealing with applications for development approval Part 10
Review Division 3
cl. 56
(b) the owner of land in respect of which an application for
development approval under this Scheme is made;
reviewable determination means a determination by the
Commission —
(a) to refuse an application for development approval under
this Scheme; or
(b) to grant development approval under this Scheme
subject to conditions; or
(c) to refuse to amend or cancel development approval
under this Scheme on application made under clause 55.
(2) An affected person may apply to the State Administrative
Tribunal for a review of a reviewable determination in
accordance with Part 14 of the Act.
(3) Also, an applicant aggrieved by either of the following decisions
by the Commission may apply to the State Administrative
Tribunal for a review of the decision in accordance with Part 14
of the Act —
(a) a decision not to transfer land from the urban deferred
zone to the urban zone;
(b) a decision not to transfer land from the industrial
deferred zone to the industrial zone.
[Clause 56 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 49
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 11 Exemptions from planning requirements for state of
emergency
cl. 57
Part 11 — Exemptions from planning requirements for
state of emergency
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
57. Minister may issue notice of exemption from planning
requirements if state of emergency declaration in force
(1) If a state of emergency declaration is in force under the
Emergency Management Act 2005 Part 5 in relation to the
whole or any area or areas of the State, the Minister may issue a
notice in writing containing 1 or more exemptions from
planning requirements under this Scheme.
(2) A notice under subclause (1) may be issued only if the Minister
considers that it is necessary to do so for the purpose of
facilitating a response to the emergency to which the state of
emergency declaration relates.
(3) A reference in subclause (1) to a planning requirement —
(a) includes, without limiting that subclause —
(i) a requirement to obtain development approval
under this Scheme; and
(ii) a requirement under a condition of development
approval under this Scheme; and
(iii) a requirement relating to the permissibility of
uses of land; and
(iv) a requirement relating to works; and
(v) a provision having the effect that a
non-conforming use of land is no longer
permitted because of a discontinuance of that
non-conforming use; and
(vi) a requirement in relation to consultation,
advertisement, applications, time limits or forms;
but
page 50 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Exemptions from planning requirements for state of Part 11
emergency
cl. 58
(b) does not include an environmental condition set out in
Schedule 1 that is incorporated into this Scheme or an
amendment to this Scheme.
(4) A notice under subclause (1) may be issued whether or not the
state of emergency declaration applies in relation to any part of
the metropolitan region, but only if it is necessary for the
purpose referred to in subclause (2).
(5) An exemption in a notice issued under subclause (1) may —
(a) apply generally or to land, or classes of land, specified in
the notice; and
(b) be unconditional or subject to any conditions specified
in the notice.
(6) The Minister —
(a) may, by notice in writing, amend a notice under
subclause (1) for the purpose referred to in
subclause (2); and
(b) may, by notice in writing, revoke a notice under
subclause (1); and
(c) must, under paragraph (b), revoke a notice under
subclause (1) if the Minister considers that the notice is
no longer necessary for the purpose referred to in
subclause (2).
[Clause 57 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
58. Process for issuing notice under cl. 57
(1) A notice under clause 57(1) or (6) must be signed by the
Minister and published in the Gazette.
(2) A notice under clause 57(1) or (6) may be combined in a single
instrument with 1 or more other notices of that kind issued
under 1 or more other region planning schemes or all other
region planning schemes.
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 51
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 11 Exemptions from planning requirements for state of
emergency
cl. 59
(3) Before issuing a notice under clause 57(1) or (6), the Minister
must, unless the Minister considers that it is impracticable to do
so because of the urgency of the circumstances, make
reasonable endeavours to consult in relation to the notice —
(a) any local governments and local government
representative bodies the Minister considers appropriate;
and
(b) the Commission.
(4) The Minister must ensure that a copy of the notice is sent to the
entities mentioned in subclause (3)(a) and (b).
(5) A failure to comply with subclause (3) or (4) in relation to a
notice does not invalidate the notice.
[Clause 58 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
59. Coming into effect and cessation of notices and exemptions
under cl. 57
(1) A notice under clause 57(1) or (6) must state the date and time
at which it is signed.
(2) A notice under clause 57(1) or (6) must also state, for each
exemption under the notice, that the exemption is to expire —
(a) when the state of emergency declaration ceases to be in
force; or
(b) at a date and time stated in the notice, which must not be
later than the end of the period of 5 years beginning on
the day on which the notice is signed.
(3) A notice under clause 57(1) or (6) takes effect when it is signed.
(4) An exemption under a notice under clause 57(1) remains in
effect, subject to any amendment or revocation of the notice
under clause 57(6), until the time of expiry stated under
subclause (2) for that exemption.
page 52 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Exemptions from planning requirements for state of Part 11
emergency
cl. 59
(5) When an exemption under a notice under clause 57(1) is
amended or ceases to be in effect, the provisions of this Scheme
in relation to non-conforming uses of land do not apply in
relation to any development of land that was permitted only
because of the effect of the exemption prior to the amendment
or cessation.
[Clause 59 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 53
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 12 Administration
cl. 60
Part 12 — Administration
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
60. Compensation
(1) A claim for compensation for injurious affection may be made
under Part 11 of the Act.
(2) For the purposes of section 178(1)(b) of the Act, a claim for
compensation for injurious affection referred to in
section 174(1)(c) of the Act must be lodged at the office of the
Commission within 6 months of the date on which the
amendment of this Scheme by which the land or property is
injuriously affected takes effect.
(3) A claim for compensation must be in the form approved by the
Commission.
[Clause 60 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
61. Power to enter into agreements
The Commission in implementing this Scheme has the power to
enter into an agreement with any owner, occupier or other
person having an interest in land affected by the provisions of
this Scheme in respect of any matters relating to this Scheme.
[Clause 61 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
62. Environmental conditions
(1) For the purposes of sections 50 and 61 of the Act,
environmental conditions referred to in sections 48F(2)
and 48G(3) of the EP Act that are incorporated into this Scheme
or an amendment to this Scheme are set out in Schedule 1.
(2) The symbol EC on the Scheme Map indicates that
environmental conditions apply to that land.
[Clause 62 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
page 54 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Administration Part 12
cl. 63
63. Certificates
On payment of the relevant fee set under section 20 of the Act,
the Commission may issue a certificate in the form approved by
the Commission in respect of any land stating —
(a) the manner in which the land is affected by this Scheme;
and
(b) if the land is reserved under this Scheme, the public
purpose for which it is reserved.
[Clause 63 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
64. Approved forms must be published on website
The Commission must ensure that a form approved by the
Commission under this Scheme is published on the Commission
website.
[Clause 64 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 55
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 13 Transitional provisions
cl. 65
Part 13 — Transitional provisions
[Heading inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
65. Terms used
In this Part —
amendment Act means the Planning and Development
Amendment (Metropolitan Region Scheme) Act 2024;
old Scheme means this Scheme as in force immediately before
commencement day;
previous, in relation to a clause of this Scheme, means the
clause as in force from time to time before commencement day;
relevant period means the period beginning on commencement
day and ending on the day that is 12 months after
commencement day.
[Clause 65 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
66. Existing lawful works
Works on land that were lawfully being carried out in the
metropolitan region before commencement day may continue to
be lawfully carried out as if the amendment Act had not come
into operation.
[Clause 66 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
67. Existing development approvals
(1) This clause applies to an approval for the development of
land —
(a) granted under the old Scheme; and
(b) that is in force immediately before commencement day.
(2) On commencement day, the approval is taken to be an approval
for development of land granted by the Commission under
Part 10.
[Clause 67 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
page 56 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Transitional provisions Part 13
cl. 68
68. Existing applications for development approval:
applications with Commission
(1) This clause applies if —
(a) before commencement day an application was made to a
local government under previous clause 28 and
forwarded to the Commission by the local government
under previous clause 29(1); and
(b) on commencement day the application is not finally
determined.
(2) The application must be dealt with by the Commission under
this Scheme.
(3) If the local government made recommendations about the
application under previous clause 29(3) the recommendations
are taken to be recommendations made under clause 37(3).
[Clause 68 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
69. Existing applications for development approval:
applications with local government
(1) This clause applies if —
(a) before commencement day an application was made to a
local government under previous clause 28 and not
forwarded to the Commission by the local government
under previous clause 29(1); and
(b) on commencement day the application is not finally
determined.
(2) The application must be dealt with by the local government
under this Scheme.
[Clause 69 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 57
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 13 Transitional provisions
cl. 70
70. Particular existing documents taken to be district structure
plans
(1) On commencement day, the following documents published on
the website <www.wa.gov.au> are taken to be district structure
plans approved by the Commission under clause 15 —
(a) the document called ‘Burswood Peninsula District
Structure Plan’ (March 2015);
(b) the document called ‘Cockburn Coast District Structure
Plan’ (September 2009);
(c) the document called ‘East Wanneroo District Structure
Plan’ (August 2021);
(d) the document called ‘North Ellenbrook (West) District
Structure Plan’ (November 2022);
(e) the document called ‘North Ellenbrook (East) District
Structure Plan’ (October 2022);
(f) the document called ‘Southern
River/Forrestdale/Brookdale/ Wungong District
Structure Plan’ (January 2001).
(2) The Commission must review the operation and effectiveness of
each district structure plan referred to in subclause (1) within
6 months after an anniversary referred to in subclause (3).
(3) The anniversaries are the 10th anniversary of commencement
day, the 20th anniversary of that day, the 30th anniversary of
that day and so on.
[Clause 70 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
71. Modified application of cl. 15 if plan adopted by
Commission during relevant period
(1) In this clause —
adopted plan means a plan —
(a) prepared by an entity other than the Commission; and
page 58 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Transitional provisions Part 13
cl. 72
(b) adopted by the Commission during the relevant period.
(2) For the purposes of clause 15(1)(a) an adopted plan is taken to
be a plan prepared by the Commission.
[Clause 71 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
72. Alternative procedure for approving district structure plans
during relevant period
(1) During the relevant period, the Commission may resolve to
approve a plan as a district structure plan under this clause,
instead of under clause 15, if —
(a) the plan was prepared by an entity other than the
Commission; and
(b) either —
(i) the Commission carried out a consultation
process for the plan; or
(ii) the Commission is satisfied that the entity carried
out a consultation process for the plan.
(2) Part 2 Division 2, other than clause 15(1) to (3), applies to the
district structure plan as if the plan had been prepared and
approved by the Commission under clause 15.
(3) This clause does not limit clause 15.
[Clause 72 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
73. References to parks and recreation and restricted public
access
In a document —
(a) a reference to land reserved under this Scheme as parks
and recreation may, if the context permits, be taken to be
a reference to land reserved under this Scheme as
regional open space; and
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 59
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Part 13 Transitional provisions
cl. 73
(b) a reference to land reserved under this Scheme as restricted
public access may, if the context permits, be taken to be a
reference to land reserved under this Scheme as regional open
space — restricted public access.
[Clause 73 inserted: Act No. 41 of 2024 s. 5.]
page 60 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
Schedule 1
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
METROPOLITAN Forrestfield Environmental Management
REGION SCHEME Marshalling Yards, Plans shall be prepared in
AMENDMENT generally bounded accordance with the
No. 984/33 by Dundas Road to specifications set out in the
(FORRESTFIELD the east, Tonkin Minister for the
MARSHALLING Highway to the Environment’s “Statement
YARDS) south, and the Perth that a Scheme may be
International Implemented” No. 000510
Effective Date: 21-10-1999
Airport to the west, published on 4 June 1999,
Gazettal Date: 29-10-1999 as per MRS for:
Amendment No.
984/33.
• Drainage and Nutrient
Management Plans;
• Soil Contamination
Remediation Plans;
• Groundwater
Contamination
Remediation Plans; and
• Groundwater Abstraction
Plan.
These Environmental
Management Plans shall be
prepared and implemented in
accordance with the
provisions of the Plans, to the
requirements of the Western
Australian Planning
Commission, with the
concurrence of the
Department of Environmental
Protection and the Water and
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 61
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Rivers Commission, where
required by the “Statement
that a Scheme may be
Implemented” No. 000510.
METROPOLITAN Northbridge Urban Environmental Management
REGION SCHEME Renewal Area, Plans and requirements shall
AMENDMENT generally bounded be prepared in accordance
No. 999/33A by Lord Street to with the specifications set out
the east, Aberdeen in the Minister for the
(NORTHBRIDGE
Street to the south, Environment’s “Statement
URBAN RENEWAL)
Newcastle Street to that a Scheme may be
the north and Implemented” No. 000542
Fitzgerald Street to published on 7 April 2000,
Effective Date: 14-4-2000
the west, as per for:
Gazettal Date: 14-4-2000 MRS Amendment
• Soil Contamination
No. 999/33A.
Management Plan(s);
• Soil Remediation
Validation Report(s);
• Groundwater
Contamination
Investigations;
• Contaminated
Groundwater
Management; and
• Contaminated Site
Schedule.
page 62 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
These Environmental
Management Plans and
requirements shall be
prepared and implemented in
accordance with the
provisions of the Plans, to the
requirements of the Western
Australian Planning
Commission, with the
concurrence of the
Department of Environmental
Protection and the Water and
Rivers Commission, where
required by the “Statement
that a Scheme may be
Implemented” No. 000542.
METROPOLITAN Marine Industry Environmental Management
REGION SCHEME Technology Park, Plans and requirements shall
AMENDMENT Munster: land be prepared in accordance
No. 991/33 (SOUTH bounded by Fawcett with the specifications set out
WEST DISTRICTS Road, Coogee in the Minister for
OMNIBUS No. 3B) Road, Frobisher Environment’s “Statement
Avenue, that a Scheme may be
Rockingham Road Implemented” No. 000546
Effective Date: 24-11-2000 and Russell Road, published on 30 May 2000,
and adjacent to for:
Gazettal Date: 15-12-2000
Lake Coogee,
Munster
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 63
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Realignment of • Environmental
“Controlled Management Plan for the
Access Highway” Marine Technology Park;
reservation, • Drainage and Nutrient
Baldivis: between Management Plan for the
Lightbody Road Marine Technology Park;
and the future
• Site Contamination
Kwinana Freeway
Management Plan; and
interchange at
• Environmental
Baldivis
Management Plan for the
Realignment of
“Controlled Access
Highway” reservation,
Baldivis.
These Environmental
Management Plans and
requirements shall be
prepared and implemented in
accordance with the
provisions of the plans, to the
requirements of the Western
Australian Planning
Commission, with the
concurrence of the
Department of
Environmental Protection
and the Water and Rivers
Commission, in consultation
with the City of Cockburn
and Land Management,
where required by the
“Statement that a Scheme
may be Implemented” No.
000546
page 64 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
METROPOLITAN As Shown on Figure Prior to application for
REGION SCHEME 1 of the Minister for subdivision or development
AMENDMENT Environment’s approval, the potential for
No. 1008/33 “Statement that a land use conflict between
Scheme may be sensitive land uses and
(SOUTH FREMANTLE /
Implemented” industrial premises shall be
HAMILTON HILL)
No.000560 identified and buffers
established where necessary
to the satisfaction of the
Effective Date: 12-12-2001
Western Australian Planning
Gazettal Date: 21-12-2001 Commission on advice of the
Department of
Environmental Protection,
City of Fremantle and City of
Cockburn.
Environmental Management
Plans and requirements shall
be prepared in accordance
with the specifications set out
in the Minister for the
Environment’s “Statement
that a Scheme may be
Implemented” No. 000560
published on 22 December
2000, for:
• Noise Management Plan;
• Site Investigation and
Management Plan; and
• Site Remediation and
Validation Report.
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 65
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
These Environmental
Management Plans and
requirements shall be
prepared and implemented in
accordance with the
provisions of the plans, to the
requirements of the Western
Australian Planning
Commission, with the
concurrence of
the Department of
Environmental Protection, in
consultation with the Health
Department of WA, Water
and Rivers Commission, City
of Fremantle and City of
Cockburn, where required by
the “Statement that a Scheme
may be Implemented”
No. 000560
METROPOLITAN Urban Deferred Management Plans and
REGION SCHEME Zone, Clarkson: requirements shall be
AMENDMENT land bounded by prepared in accordance with
No. 992/33 (CLARKSON- Marmion Avenue, the specifications set out in
BUTLER) Neerabup Road, the the Minister for the
Mitchell Freeway Environment’s “Statement
transportation that a Scheme may be
Effective Date: 13-12-2003 corridor, and the Implemented” No. 000629
Parks and published on 8 July 2003 as
Gazettal Date: 23-01-2004
Recreation follows:
reservation
• Environmental
surrounding the
Management Plan and
Tamala Park
Stygofauna and
Landfill (Portion
Troglobitic Fauna
Lot 118), Clarkson
Management Plan for the
page 66 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Urban Deferred Zone,
East-West Roads
Clarkson;
(Hester Avenue
and Neerabup • Vegetation and Fauna
Road): two district Management Plan and
distributor roads Construction Management
between Wanneroo Plan for the East-West
Road and Mitchell Roads;
Freeway • Vegetation and Fauna
transportation Management Plan and
corridor, through Construction Management
Neerabup National Plan for the Adjustments
Park to the Wanneroo Road
Reservation; and
Adjustments to
Wanneroo Road • Vegetation and Fauna
Reservation: minor Management Plan,
adjustments Construction
(reduction or
widening) of
sections of
Wanneroo Road
reservation
Mitchell Freeway • Management Plan
and part of and Noise, Vibration
Northern Suburbs and Light Management
Rail System: Plan for the Mitchell
alignment of the Freeway and part of
Mitchell Freeway the Northern Suburbs
and Northern Railway System.
Suburbs Rail
System north of
Hester Avenue,
Butler
These Management Plans and
requirements shall be
prepared and implemented in
accordance with the
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 67
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
provisions of the Plans, to the
requirements of the Western
Australian Planning
Commission, with the
concurrence of the
Environmental Protection
Authority, in consultation
with the Department of
Environmental Protection,
Water and Rivers
Commission, the Department
of Conservation and Land
Management, the Western
Australian Museum, the
University of Western
Australia (Department of
Zoology) and conservation
groups (including Quinn’s
Rock Environmental Group),
where required by the
“Statement that a Scheme
may be Implemented”
No. 000629.
Tamala Park Provisions shall be included
Landfill, in the City of Wanneroo
Clarkson: Land District Planning Scheme No.
within 500 metres 2 to preclude residential uses
of the Tamala Park from within 500 metres of the
Landfill on the active face of any existing or
Public Purposes proposed putrescible wastes
reservation (Portion filling area unless it is
Lot 118), Clarkson demonstrated to the
Environmental Protection
Authority, through
appropriate studies and
investigations, that odour,
noise, landfill gas and dust
page 68 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
will not adversely impact on
future residents.
METROPOLITAN South Coogee: land 1. Management Programs
REGION SCHEME bounded by the and Management Plan
AMENDMENT South Fremantle
The following Management
No. 1010/33 Power station and
Programs and Management
the freight line in
(PORT CATHERINE) Plan are to be prepared in
the north, the
accordance with the
limestone ridge
specifications set out in
within the Coogee
Effective Date: 24-09-04 Attachment 1 in the Minister
Open Space area to
for the Environment’s
Gazettal Date: 26-10-2004 the east, the Coogee
“Statement that a Scheme
Beach Reserve and
may be Implemented”
northern edge of the
No. 000636 published on
Cockburn Waters
20 October 2003, and shall
residential estate to
be subsequently implemented
the south, and the
in accordance with the
western extent of
provisions of those
the proposed ocean
Management Programs and
marina to the west.
Management Plan:
• Remedial Works
Management Program;
• Construction Management
Program;
• Waterways Environmental
Management Program;
and
• Noise and Vibration
Management Plan
2. Responsibilities for On-
going Management
Prior to the finalisation of a
Town Planning Scheme
Amendment for the land
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 69
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
within the Metropolitan
Region Scheme amendment
area, or the consideration of
an application for subdivision
or development within the
amendment area (other than
an application for
consolidation or minor
modification to existing
boundaries), whichever
occurs first, the
Responsible Authority shall
resolve responsibilities for
on-going environmental
management of the proposed
marina, to the satisfaction of
the Environmental protection
Authority, such that a
suitable entity, or entities,
with adequate financial
and technical resources
and authority, will ensure that
the objectives of the
Environmental Management
Program, as set out in
Attachment 1 in the Minister
for the Environment’s
“Statement that a Scheme
may be implemented”
No.000636 published on
20 October 2003, will be
achieved.
page 70 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
METROPOLITAN Parks and Prior to approving
REGION SCHEME Recreation and subdivision or development
AMENDMENT Public Purposes applications (whichever is
No. 1029/33 Reservations, sooner) for infrastructure
Alkimos: within proposals, the Western
(ALKIMOS-EGLINTON)
lots 101, 102 and Australian Planning
M1482. Commission or local
government, as the case
Effective Date: 23-06-06
requires, may require an
Gazettal Date: 07-07-06 Railways and Environmental Management
Other Regional Plan to be prepared and
Roads implemented to achieve the
Reservations, objective of managing the
Alkimos: within potential impacts of the
lots 101, 102 and proposed subdivision or
M1482 and development on the
adjoining Parks and following:
Recreation and
Public Purposes
Reservations
1) land which is reserved as
Regional Open Space in the
Scheme; and,
2) bushland or land that
may be part of an ecological
linkage.
The Environmental
Management plan shall
include:
1) a description of existing
environmental values, and the
identification of the
environmental outcome to be
achieved through the
implementation of this plan;
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 71
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
2) clear delineation of
boundaries or significant
areas to be protected;
3) management of
construction access and
rehabilitation;
4) vegetation mitigation
strategies;
5) allocation of
responsibilities and
identification of timing and
duration of implementation;
6) provision of routine
monitoring and
environmental values; and
7) provision of details of
8) contingency plans in the
event that the monitoring
surveys indicate that the
development is having or has
had an adverse impact upon
environmental values.
An Environmental
Management Plan prepared
pursuant to this condition
shall be prepared to the
satisfaction of the WAPC or
the local authority as
required, having due regard
for advice from relevant
government agencies and
shall be implemented in
accordance with a program
defined in the Environmental
Management Plan.
page 72 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Public Purposes Portions of the Public
Reservation (for Purposes reservation for the
wastewater Wastewater Treatment Plant
treatment purposes) shall be set aside and
, Alkimos: within managed for conservation
lots 101 and 102. purposes in accordance with
the requirements set out in
Attachment 1 of the Minister
for the Environment’s
“Statement that a Scheme
may be implemented”
No. 722, published on
24 April 2006.
Urban Deferred Lifting of Urban Deferment
Zoning, Alkimos: within the southern portion of
within lots 101 and the Wastewater Treatment
102. Plant Buffer shall not occur
unless it is demonstrated to
the requirements of the
Environmental Protection
Authority that the area within
which Urban Deferment is to
be lifted is not subject to
odour at a level likely to
cause adverse impacts on the
amenity of odour sensitive
land uses.
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 73
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Parks and With the exception of the
Recreation areas specified below, all land
Reservations, reserved for Parks and
Alkimos, Eglinton Recreation shall be managed
and Yanchep: to protect the integrity,
within part lot 6, function and environmental
and lots 8, 11, 14, values of the bushland and
15, 101, 102, landforms to the requirement
M1482 and M1503 of the western Australian
Planning Commission on the
advice of the Environmental
Protection Authority and
shall only be used for
conservation, landscape and
complimentary purposes.
Parks and A maximum of 25 percent of
Recreation the area of the land is to be
Reservation, reserved for Parks and
Alkimos: Recreation identified as Areas
within lot 102 and 6a and 6b on the map
adjoining the Public attached to the Minister for
Purposes the Environment’s “Statement
Reservation for that a Scheme may be
ground water implemented” No. 722,
treatment purposes. published on 24 April 2005,
may be developed for Parks
and Recreation purposes in
accordance with an
Environmental Management
Plan prepared to the
requirements of the
Environmental Protection
Authority.
page 74 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
METROPOLITAN Stakehill Swamp, An Environmental
REGION SCHEME Baldivis Management Plan shall be
AMENDMENT prepared in accordance with
Stakehill Swamp is
No. 1050/33 the specifications set out in
generally bounded
the Minister for the
(STAKEHILL SWAMP) by Stakehill Road,
Environment’s “Statement
Mandurah Road,
that a Scheme may be
Sixty Eight Road
Implemented” No. 000752
Effective Date: 14-11-08
and Eighty Road,
published on
Gazettal Date: 23-12-08 south east of Lake 11 October 2007 following
Cooloongup as per
finalisation of the
MRS Amendment
Metropolitan Region Scheme
1050/33.
process and prior to
finalisation of the City of
Rockingham Town Planning
Scheme process to reserve
Stakehill Swamp for Parks
and Recreation.
The objective of the
Environmental Management
Plan is to ensure the
protection of the significant
values of Stakehill Swamp
including wetland, flora,
fauna and biodiversity.
The Environmental
Management Plan shall
include:
• Fire management,
including the closure of
Jarvis Road;
• Weed management;
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 75
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
• Recreation and public
access;
• Groundwater resource
management;
• Fauna;
• Flora; and
• Wetland ecology.
METROPOLITAN Maida Vale: Land General
REGION SCHEME generally bounded
1. The Responsible
AMENDMENT No. by Roe Highway to
Authority must act
1344/57 the west, Sultana
consistently with—
Road East to the
(MAIDA VALE URBAN
south, Hawtin Road A the requirements of
PRECINCT)
to the east and Ministerial
Urban and Rural Statement 1240; and
zoned land to the
Effective Date: B the achievement of
north.
9 September 2025 the environmental
outcomes in
Gazettal: 9 September
Attachment A to
2025
Ministerial
Statement 1240
when exercising
powers under the
MRS or approving
any subdivision for
land in the MRS
Amendment Area.
page 76 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Requirements before
structure plan approval
2. The Responsible
Authority must not
approve any structure
plan for the MRS
Amendment Area unless
it is satisfied—
A in consultation with
the Department of
Water and
Environmental
Regulation (DWER)
that—
a. the Foreshore
Assessment
Report (FAR) for
Crumpet Creek
has been
updated;
b. the District
Water
Management
Strategy
(DWMS) has
been updated;
and
c. a Local Water
Management
Strategy
(LWMS) has
been prepared;
and
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 77
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
B in consultation with
DWER and
Department of
Biodiversity,
Conservation and
Attractions
(DBCA), that a
Foreshore
Management Plan
has been prepared in
accordance with the
requirements in
Attachment A of
Ministerial
Statement 1240.
3. The Responsible
Authority must not
approve any structure
plan for the MRS
Amendment Area unless
it is satisfied that surveys
for black cockatoo and, if
required, buffer
investigations have been
carried out for any land
in the MRS Amendment
Area to which the
structure plan relates, in
accordance with the
requirements in
Attachment A of
Ministerial Statement
1240.
page 78 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
Structure Plan
4. The Responsible
Authority must not
approve any subdivision
for the MRS Amendment
Area unless —
A the proposed
subdivision is a
minor subdivision;
or
B a structure plan that
complies with the
requirements in
Attachment A of
Ministerial
Statement 1240 has
been approved
under an applicable
local planning
scheme.
Further Surveys
5. Prior to approval of any
subdivision (other than
minor subdivision) for
any Unsurveyed Land,
surveys for flora and
vegetation, black
cockatoo and associated
habitat and, if required,
buffer investigations
must be carried out in
accordance with the
requirements in
Attachment A of
Ministerial Statement
1240 unless the
Responsible Authority
considers in consultation
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 79
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
with DWER and DBCA
that the relevant survey
and/or buffer
investigation is not
required.
6. Prior to approval of any
subdivision (other than
minor subdivision) for
any land in the MRS
Amendment Area, black
cockatoo surveys and, if
required, buffer
investigations must be
carried out in accordance
with the requirements in
Attachment A of
Ministerial Statement
1240 unless the
Responsible Authority
considers in consultation
with DWER and DBCA
that the relevant survey
and/or buffer
investigation is not
required. Management
plans for retention areas.
page 80 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
7. Prior to approval of any
subdivision (other than
minor subdivision) for
land that wholly or partly
includes an initial
retention area or an
additional retention area,
a management plan that
complies with the
requirements in
Attachment A to
Ministerial Statement
1240 must be prepared
for the retention area
unless the Responsible
Authority considers, in
consultation with DBCA
and DWER, that a
management plan is not
required.
8. A management plan for a
retention area must be
implemented to the
satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority, in
consultation with DWER
and/or DBCA.
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 81
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Subdivision
9. Subject to condition 10,
the Responsible
Authority must not
approve a subdivision
(other than minor
subdivision) unless—
A the proposed
subdivision is
consistent with—
a. the aspects of the
approved
structure plan
that address the
requirements in
Attachment A of
Ministerial
Statement 1240;
and
b. the achievement
of the
environmental
outcomes in
Attachment A to
Ministerial
Statement 1240;
and
page 82 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
B the Responsible
Authority is
satisfied, in
consultation with
DWER and DBCA,
that—
a. any surveys
required by
condition 5 and 6
have been carried
out;
b. any management
plan required by
condition 7 has
been prepared;
c. any retention
area within the
relevant land will
be—
i. ceded to the
Crown as a
reserve for
conservation;
or
ii. otherwise
protected in
perpetuity;
and
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 83
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
d. any significant
impacts to
environmental
values that will
be caused by the
subdivision will
be appropriately
offset in
accordance with
an Offset Plan
that meets the
requirements in
Attachment A to
Ministerial
Statement 1240.
10. The precise boundaries
of the initial retention
areas shown in Figure 1
and the additional
retention areas identified
through further surveys
may be refined through
the subdivision approval
process, provided that
such refinement will not
adversely impact the
environmental values of
the area or prevent the
environmental outcomes
in Attachment A of
Ministerial Statement
1240 from being
achieved.
page 84 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Retention areas and
foreshore buffer
11. Subject to condition 10,
no ground disturbing
activities are permitted
in—
A the initial retention
areas and additional
retention areas; or
B the foreshore area
and foreshore buffer
of Crumpet Creek as
shown in Figure 2
or, if the FAR has
been updated, as
delineated in that
FAR,
unless—
C the activity is low
impact management;
or
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 85
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
D it is demonstrated to
the satisfaction of
the Responsible
Authority in
consultation with
DWER and DBCA
that the activity is
consistent with the
achievement of the
environmental
outcomes in
Attachment A of
Ministerial
Statement 1240 and
the environmental
values of the area
will not be
materially impacted.
Environmental
Performance Report
12. The Responsible
Authority must submit
Environmental
Performance Reports to
DWER in accordance
with the requirements in
Attachment A of
Ministerial Statement
1240.
page 86 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Definitions
13. Terms in these conditions
have the meaning set out
Table 1 of Ministerial
Statement 1240.
Attachment A of Ministerial
Statement 1240 contains the
Specifications for Retention
Areas, Foreshore Areas and
Environmental Values and
Objectives for Amendment
1344/57.
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 87
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
METROPOLITAN Wattle Grove: Environmental outcomes
REGION SCHEME Land generally
1. Within the Amendment
AMENDMENT NO. bounded by Crystal
Area, it is an objective of
1388/57 Brook Road /
this scheme that
Welshpool Road
WATTLE GROVE subdivision and
East to the south,
(SOUTH) PRECINCT development is
Boundary Road and
consistent with the
Effective Date: 29 May 2026 Tonkin Highway to
achievement of the
the west, Victoria
Gazettal: 29 May 2026 environmental outcomes
Road and Rural
in condition 3.
zoned land to the
east. 2. The Responsible
Authority must act
consistently with—
(1) the requirements of
Ministerial
Statement 1267; and
(2) the achievement of
the environmental
outcomes in
condition 3;
when exercising powers
under this scheme or
when determining an
application to subdivide
land in the Amendment
Area.
page 88 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
3. The environmental
outcomes are—
(1) Avoid disturbance to
the following
environmental
values within
retention areas
(Figure 1), except
when undertaking
low impact
activities—
(a) Banksia attenuata
woodlands over
species rich
dense shrublands
(FCT 20a);
(b) Shrublands and
Woodlands of
the Eastern Swan
Coastal Plain
(FCT 20c);
(c) Viable
populations of
Conospermum
undulatum;
(d) Viable
populations of
Isopogon
autumnalis;
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 89
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
(e) medium to high
quality foraging
habitat for
carnaby’s
cockatoo (Zanda
latirostris) and
baudin’s
cockatoo (Zanda
baudinii); and
(f) potential nesting
trees.
(2) Avoid disturbance to
black cockatoo
known nesting trees
and roosting sites
within the
Amendment Area.
(3) Retain trees or,
where retention is
not practicable,
replace trees in the
Amendment Area
to—
(a) achieve a
generally even
distribution of
trees across parts
of the
Amendment
Area that are not
within retention
areas; and
page 90 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
(b) to create
connectivity
between
retention areas
and retained
black cockatoo
habitat.
(4) Avoid or where not
practicable,
minimise adverse
impacts to the
Greater Brixton
Street Wetlands
from urban
development of the
Amendment Area,
including impacts to
the wetlands’
persistency,
hydrological regime,
water quality,
ecological integrity
and ecological
function.
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 91
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Conservation Area
Management Plans
4. The Responsible
Authority must not
approve any subdivision
(other than minor
subdivision) or
development for land that
includes all or part of a
retention area unless it is
satisfied, after consulting
with DWER, DBCA and
the local government,
that—
(1) a Conservation Area
Management Plan
has been prepared
for the retention
area; and
(2) the Conservation
Area Management
Plan is consistent
with the
achievement of the
environmental
outcomes in
condition 3 and—
(a) provides for the
installation and
maintenance of
appropriate
fencing around
the periphery of
the retention
area;
page 92 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
(b) provides for the
monitoring of
occurrences of
Threatened
Ecological
Community
(TECs) and
populations of
threatened flora;
and
(c) identifies actions
that will be
implemented to
ensure that—
(i) occurrences
of TECs that
are in
‘degraded’
condition are
restored to
achieve a
condition
rating of
‘good’ or
better, in
accordance
with Keighery
1994;
(ii) populations of
threatened
flora are
maintained or
increased;
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 93
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
(iii) buffers to
threatened
flora are
established
and
maintained;
(iv) the spread of
existing weed
species and
pathogens,
and the
introduction
of new weed
species and
pathogens, is
minimised;
(d) provides that the
only
development to
occur within the
retention area is
to be
development for
the purposes of
conservation or
incidental
purposes; and
(3) satisfactory
arrangements have
or will be made for
the implementation
of the Conservation
Area Management
Plan.
page 94 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Black cockatoos
5. The Responsible
Authority must not
approve any subdivision
(other than minor
subdivision) or
development for any land
in the Amendment Area
that is unsurveyed land
unless it is satisfied that a
black cockatoo survey
that meets the
requirements of DWER
has been carried out for
that unsurveyed land.
6. The Responsible
Authority must not
approve any subdivision
or development for any
land in the Amendment
Area, if the subdivision
or development is likely
to impact a potential
nesting tree unless it is
satisfied, after consulting
with DWER, that—
(1) an assessment has
been carried out to
identify, record and
determine the
number of potential
nesting trees likely
to be impacted and
the number of
potential nesting
trees likely to be
retained;
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 95
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
(2) the number of
potential nesting
trees likely to be
impacted has been
quantified; and
(3) at least twice the
number of potential
nesting trees likely
to be impacted will
be replaced by
planting within the
Amendment Area.
Tree canopy
7. The Responsible
Authority must not
approve any subdivision
(other than minor
subdivision) or
development for any land
in the Amendment Area
unless it is satisfied
that—
(1) a Tree Canopy
Retention and
Landscape
Management Plan
for the land has been
prepared, having
regard to any urban
forest strategy
adopted by the City
of Kalamunda; and
page 96 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
(2) the Tree Canopy
Retention and
Landscape
Management Plan is
consistent with the
achievement of the
environmental
outcomes in
condition 3 and—
(a) identifies the
location, species,
size and
structural health
of any trees to be
retained, with
particular regard
to potential
nesting trees;
(b) identifies the
location, species,
number, planting
size, mature
height and spread
of trees to be
planted;
(c) identifies the
planting schedule
for the trees to be
planted; and
(d) estimates the
percentage of
canopy coverage
expected to be
achieved through
implementation
of the plan; and
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 97
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
(3) satisfactory
arrangements have
or will be made for
the implementation
of the Tree Canopy
Retention and
Landscape
Management Plan,
unless the
Responsible
Authority considers
that a plan, or a plan
that meets all the
requirements in
condition 7(2), is
not required.
Water management
8. The Responsible
Authority must not
approve any structure
plan for the Amendment
area unless it is satisfied,
after consulting with
DWER, DBCA and the
local government, that
the structure plan
includes a Local Water
Management Strategy
(LWMS) for the land the
subject of the structure
plan that is consistent
with—
page 98 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
(1) any relevant
approved District
Water Management
Strategy; and
(2) the achievement of
the environmental
outcome in
condition 3(4).
9. The Responsible
Authority must not
approve any subdivision
(other than minor
subdivision) or
development unless it is
satisfied, after consulting
with DWER, DBCA and
the local government,
that—
(1) an Urban Water
Management Plan
(UWMP) has been
prepared for the land
the subject of the
subdivision or
development; and
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 99
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
(2) the UWMP is
consistent with the
applicable LWMS
and informed by the
results of any pre-
development
monitoring program,
unless the
Responsible
Authority considers,
after consulting with
DWER, that a
UWMP, or a
UWMP that meets
the requirements in
condition 8(2), is
not required.
page 100 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Schedule 1
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
Reporting
10. The Responsible
Authority must submit an
environmental
performance report
which is inclusive of all
subdivisions within the
Amendment Area to
DWER within three
months after the end of
the Initial Report Year
and subsequently within
three months after the
end of each Report
Period or by such later
date as DWER confirms
in writing, until DWER
confirms in writing that
reports no longer need to
be submitted under this
condition.
11. An environmental
performance report
must—
(1) identify any
structure plan
approved by the
Responsible
Authority for all or
part of the
Amendment Area;
and
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 101
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Schedule 1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
AMENDMENT No. LOCATION ENVIRONMENTAL
AND GAZETTAL DATE CONDITIONS
(2) demonstrate, in
relation to the
preceding Report
Period how the
Responsible
Authority has acted
consistently with the
requirements of
Ministerial
Statement 1267 and
the achievement of
the environmental
outcomes in
condition 3 when
exercising powers
under this scheme or
when determining
an application to
subdivide land in the
Amendment Area.
Definitions
12. Defined terms in these
conditions have the
meaning set out in
Table 1 of Ministerial
Statement 1267.
[Schedule 1 inserted: Gazette 30 Jun 1998 p. 3540; amended: Gazette
9 Sep 2025 p. 1547-51; 29 May 2026 p. 878-84 (correction
2 Jun 2026 p. 912).]
page 102 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Compilation table Notes
Notes
This is a compilation of the Metropolitan Region Scheme Parts 1 to 13 and Schedule 1.
The Metropolitan Region Scheme clause 3 states that the Scheme comprises —
(a) the provisions of the Scheme; and
(b) the Scheme Map (sheets 1 to 38); and
(c) all other maps, plans, specifications and other particulars contained in the
Scheme.
The Scheme Map is not included in this compilation. The Scheme Map is available via
this link: Scheme Map.
The Metropolitan Region Scheme was originally made under the Metropolitan Region
Town Planning Scheme Act 1959 section 30, and continued in force by the Planning and
Development Act 2005 section 33(1).
The Metropolitan Region Scheme Parts I to V were replaced with Parts 1 to 13 by the
Planning and Development Amendment (Metropolitan Region Scheme) Act 2024
section 5. For the effect of the amendments made to the Scheme by that Act, see
section 8 of that Act. See also the Planning and Development Act 2005 section 175(2A)
and (2B).
Compilation table
Citation Published Commencement
Metropolitan Region Scheme 9 Aug 1963 30 Oct 1963 (see Gazette
p. 2318-25 1 Nov 1963 p. 3340)
[Note: subsequent amendments before the following item are not included]
Planning and Development Amendment (Metropolitan 31 Mar 2025 (see s. 2(b) and
Region Scheme) Act 2024 assented to 29 Oct 2024 SL 2024/251 cl. 2)
Metropolitan Region Scheme 9 Sep 2025 9 Sep 2025 (see Gazette
Amendment 1344/57 (Minor) p. 1547-51 9 Sep 2025 p. 1547)
Metropolitan Region Scheme 29 May 2026 29 May 2026 (see Gazette
Amendment 1388/57 (Minor) p. 878-84 29 May 2026 p. 878)
(correction
2 Jun 2026
p. 912)
As at 02 Jun 2026 Official Version page 103
[PCO 00-d0-00] Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au

Metropolitan Region Scheme
Defined terms
Defined terms
[This is a list of terms defined and the provisions where they are defined.
The list is not part of the law.]
Defined term Provision(s)
adopted plan ................................................................................................... 71(1)
affected person ............................................................................................... 56(1)
amendment Act ................................................................................................... 65
Bush Forever area ................................................................................................. 7
commencement day .............................................................................................. 7
Commission website ............................................................................................. 7
development approval under this Scheme ............................................................. 7
district structure plan.................................................................................. 7, 14(1)
heritage-protected place ............................................................................... 7, 8(1)
local government ................................................................................................... 7
non-conforming use .............................................................................................. 7
old Scheme .......................................................................................................... 65
owner .................................................................................................................... 7
plan area ................................................................................................................ 7
previous ............................................................................................................... 65
publication day ............................................................................................... 23(2)
region planning scheme policy .................................................................... 7, 9(1)
relevant period .................................................................................................... 65
relevant public authority ................................................................................ 44(3)
reserved land ......................................................................................................... 7
reserved land owned by or vested in a public authority ................................. 29(2)
reviewable determination ............................................................................... 56(1)
SCRM Minister .............................................................................................. 45(1)
Swan Canning development control area ................................................... 7, 45(1)
Trust ............................................................................................................... 45(1)
zoned land ............................................................................................................. 7
© State of Western Australia 2026.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence (CC BY 4.0).
To view relevant information and for a link to a copy of the licence, visit www.legislation.wa.gov.au.
Attribute work as: © State of Western Australia 2026.
By Authority: ANDREW JONES, Government Printer
page 104 Official Version As at 02 Jun 2026
Published on www.legislation.wa.gov.au [PCO 00-d0-00]