107/2012
Planning Bulletin 107/2012
Model Subdivision Conditions
August 2012
Introduction conditions. The draft set of revised New Model Subdivision
conditions included a limited number of Conditions Schedule
The Model Subdivision Conditions
new conditions to deal with new policy
Schedule is an essential tool used The 2009 Model Subdivision
measures and issues that had arisen
by the Western Australian Planning Conditions Schedule consisted of 178
since the last review of the Schedule in
Commission (WAPC) to ensure conditions, and 86 advice notes. The
2005.
compliance with the statutory and revised Model Subdivision Conditions
policy responsibilities of the WAPC in Submissions were received during the Schedule (2012) consists of 108
granting approval to subdivide land into public advertising period, and a series conditions and 25 advice notes. This
freehold, survey strata and strata titles. of internal and external workshops were is a reduction of approximately 40 per
undertaken that focussed on specific cent in the number of conditions and
The Model Subdivision Conditions
topics including: environment, water approximately 70 per cent in advice
Schedule is to be used by referral
management, engineering, roads and notes from the 2009 Schedule.
agencies in response to WAPC
transport, buildings and land use.
subdivision referrals to assist in the A copy of the Schedule can be found
timely determination of applications. Most of the submissions were received on the Planning WA website at
from local government and Government www.planning.wa.gov.au
A review of the current Model
referral agencies. Generally, the
Subdivision Conditions Schedule The Schedule includes 13 parts:
submissions were supportive of the
(January 2009) has been undertaken,
review, though a number of key issues
resulting in the release of a new • Administration;
were raised, primarily relating to the
Schedule (2012) adopted by the WAPC.
validity test of conditions, inconsistent • Amenity;
application of conditions, multiple
• Buildings and Use;
clearance agencies, duplication of
Background
conditions, head of power and time
• Drainage and Site Works;
In 2009, the WAPC commenced delays.
the review of the Model Subdivision • Electricity and Gas Pipelines;
A review was undertaken internally with
Conditions Schedule. The WAPC
representatives within the Department • Environment;
and Department of Planning released
of Planning. In addition, an external
‘Planning Makes it Happen – A Blueprint
• Fire and Emergency;
peer review group comprising of
for Planning Reform’ (September 2009),
planning consultants, local government,
which included the review of the Model • Heritage
Urban Development Institute of
Subdivision Condition Schedule as part (Indigenous, State, Local etc);
Australia and land developers
of the planning reforms and identified
undertook a review. The peer review • Lot Design;
the following objectives of the review:
group was supportive of the Model
• School Sites;
• Reduce the number of conditions Subdivision Conditions Schedule and
imposed on approvals; their comments resulted in further • Reserves;
modifications to the Schedule.
• Standardise and simplifying
• Transport, Roads and Access; and
conditions to core issues; The review aimed at reducing
conditions wherever possible, with the • Water and Sewer.
• Ensure conditions are specific, so
focus on core planning matters that
that proponents and clearance
are consistent with planning policy and
agencies are clear as to Assessment
best planning practice. It also included
requirements;
the deletion of a large number of advice The sensitive use of planning
• Ensure consistency with the validity notes, as the WAPC determined that conditions can improve the quality of
rules set by the State Administrative they should be used sparingly, if at all, a proposal, enabling an application to
Tribunal; and on subdivision approvals that refer to be approved, that may otherwise have
non-planning legislation and unrelated to be refused. In order to ensure public
• Avoid condition duplication. matters. New conditions requested confidence in the planning system it
by referral agencies have generally is important that conditions are only
In February 2010, the Model
not been incorporated unless they are imposed where they meet the validity
Subdivision Conditions Schedule
commonly used or reflect a planning test.
Review Consultation Paper was
policy basis.
released for public comment. The
Model conditions do not replace
Consultation Paper included a review of
thorough and careful assessment of
the frequency of use of conditions and
applications and should not be used
advice notes, and a draft set of revised
as a matter of routine. The need for

each condition should be carefully general principle, it is not the role of Further information
considered against the merits of the subdivision conditions and advice
Enquiries concerning this planning
case by both the referral agency in notes to advise of requirements of other
bulletin should be directed to:
recommending conditions and the legislation, or requirements applying at
WAPC in imposing the conditions. the development approval stage. Principal Planner
Operational Policy Coordination
Gordon Stephenson House
Validity test Amendments to the Schedule
140 William Street
The State Administrative Tribunal (SAT) The Model Subdivision Conditions PERTH WA 6000
and other appeal bodies in Australia Schedule is a living document that
Locked Bag 2506
have adopted the approach taken in requires regular monitoring and
Perth WA 6001
Newbury DC v Secretary of State for the amendment to ensure relevance in
Environment (1981) when considering terms of best practice. As statutory As part of its continuing improvements
the validity of specific conditions. That and policy requirements change, the to its service to clients and the public,
decision held that in order to be valid a Schedule needs to be updated to reflect the WAPC has an internet site at the
condition must: those changes. following address:
• be imposed for a planning purpose; When drafting a new condition, referral www.planning.wa.gov.au
agencies must provide justification for
• fairly and reasonably relate to the a proposed new condition and consult This site contains a range of information
development for which permission with the Perth and Peel Planning concerning the WAPC, including
is given; and Division of the Department of Planning planning bulletins.
that has custodianship of the Schedule.
• be reasonable, that is, be a
Following an assessment of the
condition which a reasonable
proposed new conditions and providing
planning authority, properly
agreement is given by the Perth and
advised, might impose.
Peel Planning Division, the proposed
new condition will be reported to
Non-Standard conditions and the Statutory Planning Committee
advice notes of the WAPC for consideration and
endorsement. Once endorsement is
In general, the WAPC will not support obtained the new condition will be
the use of non-standard conditions included within the Model Subdivision Disclaimer
when the circumstance is adequately Conditions Schedule. This document has been published by the
covered by a model condition included Western Australian Planning Commission. Any
in the Schedule. There may, however, Following an examination of non- representation, statement, opinion or advice
be site specific conditions or specific standard conditions, including expressed or implied in this publication is
circumstances that warrant the use of a consultation with referral agencies the made in good faith and on the basis that the
government, its employees and agents are not
non-standard condition. WAPC will develop an addendum to the
liable for any damage or loss whatsoever which
Model Subdivision Conditions Schedule may occur as a result of action taken or not
In such cases, the referral agency to provide for conditions that arise due taken, as the case may be, in respect of any
must provide the WAPC with to local circumstances. This will be an representation, statement, opinion or advice
adequate justification to support the ongoing process as part of the review. referred to herein. Professional advice should
recommended condition, having regard be obtained before applying the information
contained in this document to particular
to the WAPC’s planning framework, and
circumstances.
with regard to the validity test applied Review of the Model Subdivision
© State of Western Australia
by the SAT. Conditions
Published by the
Where the requirement for a non- A review of the Model Subdivision Western Australian Planning Commission
standard condition is specified within a Conditions Schedule by the Department Gordon Stephenson House
local planning scheme, WAPC endorsed of Planning will commence 12 months 140 William Street
Perth WA 6000
strategy, planning policy, or a district after its release to ensure the conditions
or local structure plan, such conditions continue to be robust and address Locked Bag 2506
Perth WA 6001
should be drafted to ensure that it is current planning policy and practice.
clear as to: Published August 2010
ISSN 1324-9142
• what the landowner/applicant
website: www.planning.wa.gov.au
needs to do and by when;
email: corporate@planning.wa.gov.au
• who is the responsible clearing tel: 08 6551 9000
agency; and fax: 08 6551 9001
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
• the final determination of infoline: 1800 626 477
compliance of the condition This document is available in alternative formats
ultimately being the responsibility of on application to WAPC Communication
the WAPC. Services
Advice notes can be used to provide
supplementary information to inform
conditions, but have no legal status
and should be used sparingly. As a
2