Energy Efficiency in Building Design
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP 1.5
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 6 August 2019
Policy Objectives
To encourage the incorporation of environmentally sustainable and energy efficient design
principles as standard practice in the development of buildings.
Policy Scope
The Policy applies to all development within the City. The Policy highlights principles of energy
efficiency and environmental sustainability and encourages applicants, builders, and developers, to
consider the inclusion of these elements into development proposals. The City will have regard to
these principles, and the extent to which they should be taken into consideration in respect of
specific development proposals, on a case by case basis.
Policy Statement
All new buildings and substantial alterations to existing buildings are encouraged to incorporate the
following environmental and energy efficient design principles:
1 Building Orientation/Passive Solar Design
Buildings are to be orientated on site to ensure outdoor living areas and openings to indoor
living areas face to the north. A northern orientation will ensure benefits of natural solar
heating and daylight are maximized in cooler months. Conversely, negative aspects of
heat gain during warmer months can be minimized.
The Council may have regard to the inclusion of features in a building design to optimize
elements of passive solar design or to compensate for their omission. Relevant design
features include the following:
• Building orientation so as to maximise heat gain through north facing walls and
windows, whilst minimising walls and windows facing west.
• Building layout and window placement to maximise solar access/northern orientation to
living areas.
• Extended eaves or other such features such as patios or pergolas located appropriately
near north facing windows of habitable and living rooms to minimise excessive heat
gain in summer months.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:47 AM Page 1 of 4
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

• Use of concrete slab floor and full ceiling and wall insulation help to stabilise internal
temperatures minimising heat gain in hot months and heat loss in colder months.
• Other features such as verandahs, solar pergolas, sky lights, double glazed windows,
awnings, double brick construction and weather stripping may also be used to optimise
elements of passive solar design.
2 Solar Access
In conjunction with the provisions of the Residential Design Codes, the City shall have
regard to location or roof pitch of a development where solar access to buildings and
courtyards on an adjoining lot are threatened. Particular regard will be had to the protection
of solar access in strata lot development. In such cases, impact of overshadowing may be
greater and more concentrated when considering the location of courtyard areas, living
room windows and solar electricity and hot water systems.
3 Landscaping – Climate Control, Waterwise Gardens and the Retention of Trees
Landscaping plans required for all development shall incorporate principles of waterwise
design and optimize elements of passive solar design and climate control. In terms of
climate control and passive solar design, landscaping plans are to have regard to the
following principles:
• Evergreen plants on the east and west side of a building to block undesirable solar
radiation.
• Deciduous plants located on the north side of a building to block undesirable solar
radiation in summer whilst ensuring its provision in winter.
• Densely planted shrubs on the eastern and north western sides of a building to block
hot easterly winds in summer and cold north westerly winds in winter.
Landscaping plans are required to demonstrate the use of waterwise plants (as defined by
the Water Corporation of Western Australia) and the incorporation of waterwise irrigation
(trickle drippers and/or sub mulch irrigation with automated controllers and rain sensors.
Wherever possible and practical, significant individual trees should be preserved on private
lots. Trees add value to property and contribute significantly to the amenity of the locality,
providing shade, shelter from wind, habitat for wildlife and filter for air pollution and traffic
noise.
4 Building Infrastructure Initiatives
The Building Code of Australia incorporates energy efficiency provisions for the design and
construction of new buildings and additions and alterations to existing buildings.
Notwithstanding the requirements of the Building Code of Australia, new buildings and
substantial alterations and additions to existing buildings are encouraged to incorporate the
following features:
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:47 AM Page 2 of 4
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Plumbed Rainwater Tanks:
Tanks and pumps to service toilet flushing, laundry, hot water service and garden are
suggested.
Greywater Systems:
Systems are encouraged connecting bathroom and laundry waste water to an approved
greywater irrigation area.
Solar Water Heaters:
Solar water systems to be installed as an integral and compatible feature of the roof design,
preferably located so as to not be visible from the primary street.
Photovoltaic Energy Systems:
Where visible from the primary street consideration is to be given to ensuring the system is
designed as an integral and compatible feature of the roof design. Systems are to comply
with relevant safety and electrical requirements.
Insulation:
Insulation of walls, ceilings and/or roofs is encouraged and can significantly reduce heat
transfer and minimize energy usage. Roof spaces should also be ventilated to reduce heat
transfer to living areas.
Roofing:
Light roof colours reflect heat, preventing surfaces from becoming excessively hot whilst
dark roof colours absorb heat which is then transferred to the home. Accordingly, light roof
colours such as light greys, cream and light beige are encouraged from an energy
efficiency viewpoint. Very light coloured roofing materials such as colorbond profiled
sheeting in white or surfmist, and zinc coated products such as zincalume, do however,
have the potential to adversely impact on occupiers of adjacent properties by virtue of the
glare and reflectivity associated with them.
Fixtures, Fittings and Appliances:
Incorporation of flow regulators to kitchen and bathroom taps and shower heads and dual
flush toilet systems are recommended. Energy efficient appliances are encouraged, in
particular dishwashers and washing machines, to reduce energy and water usage.
5 Promotion of Energy Efficient and Environmentally Sustainable Building Design
The Council’s position with respect to supporting building designs which are
environmentally sustainable and energy efficient is to be promoted through the
implementation of this Policy, preparation of a related public information sheet to
accompany the Policy and distribution of the information to stakeholders in the building and
design and construction industry.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:47 AM Page 3 of 4
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No. 6
State Planning Policy 7.3. Residential Design Codes
Volume 1 and Residential Design Codes Volume 2 -
Apartments
Local Planning Policies
Delegated Authority No: DA-020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Planning and Development Services Committee 19/03/1991
Reviews
Special Planning and Development Services Committee 27/06/2000 P00/1004
Ordinary Meeting of Council 11/10/2011 P11/3255
Ordinary Meeting of Council 18/03/2014 P14/3471
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/09/2016 P16/3718
Administrative Review 6/8/2019
(Council Resolution 18/6/2019)
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:47 AM Page 4 of 4
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.