PARLIAMENT HOUSE PRECINCT
PLANNING BULLETIN JULY 1983
THE METROPOLITAN REGION PLANNING AUTHORITY, PERTH, WESTERN AUSTRALIA

PARLIAMENT HOUSE PRECINCT
In 1897 Parliament investigated in detail two sites for the construction of
Parliament House. Building designs were prepared for both sites and eventually
in consideration of the signifi cance of the Institution of Parliament and
consequently of Parliament House, Parliament decided on the Harvest Terrace
site on the axis of St. George’s Terrace overlooking and being visible from the
City. The removal of the Pensioner’s Barracks building was integral with this
decision.
In 1963 an Inter Departmental Committee was formed to study the environment
of Parliament House. Whilst assessing the impact of the Mitchell Freeway and
of the Public Offi ce development, the importance of Parliament Hill and its
relationship with the City led to the following observations:
Parliament House should always be visible and accessible. It should be part
of a wider design embracing a Parliamentary Precinct.
Its visual linkage with the City should be evident and its place in the whole
composition should be respected.
Although it may not be the biggest or highest building, it should be the
dominant element at the head of the Terrace.
Landscaping should be developed according to a comprehensive design in
and around the entire site.
Motor vehicles in car parks should not intrude into the landscape or
dominate any portion of it.
Parliament Place has important associations with Parliament House
and should be treated accordingly. Its design should be expansive and
attractively landscaped.
The Committee summarised three important considerations which became the
prime objectives of the Precinct Policy.
1. The need for maintaining views of Parliament House from the City.
2. The need for maintaining views over the Swan River from the terraces of
Parliament House.
3. The need for controlling the appearance of Parliament House Precinct.
1

In order to achieve these objectives The Metropolitan Region Planning Authority
in August 1964 invoked Clause 32 of the Metropolitan Region Scheme so
requiring that all development applications in the Parliament House Precinct be
submitted to the Authority for determination.
A Building Design Advisory Committee was established in December 1964 to
advise the Authority on development applications and progressively to establish
desirable design standards and building height limits to meet the aims of the
Precinct Policy.
An Architectural Design Sub Committee was formed to assist the Advisory
Committee.
In November 1971 a Planning Bulletin setting out details of the Precinct Policy
was published by the Authority and in August 1977 detailed policies relating to
development on properties fronting Bellevue Terrace were made. In April 1980
the Precinct boundary was extended to include properties fronting Mounts Bay
Road.
A review of the Precinct Policy was commenced in April 1980 and completed in
November 1981.
2

OBJECTIVES
1. To recognise the signifi cance of the Institution of Parliament.
2. To reinforce the unique role Parliament Hill plays in the structure of the
City.
POLICIES
To achieve these objectives the following policies have been adopted
1. Generally it is intended that development heights be restricted on particular
sites to establish compatible scale relationships between Parliament House
and adjacent development and also to protect views between Parliament
Hill and other important city elements, such as
• Swan River Perth and Melville Water
• South Perth foreshore and Mill Point
• Esplanade and Supreme Court Gardens
• Heirisson Island and the Darling Scarp
• Central City block particularly the St. George’s Terrace vista.
Maximum heights are total and include superstructures, lift overrun, and
plant rooms, etc.
2. There shall be a presumption against the use of illuminated signs visible
from Parliament Hill and the use of metal oxide coated glasses or similar in
the Inner Precinct.
The use of large areas of highly refl ective materials is deprecated in the
Inner Precinct. (Highly refl ective materials are considered to include all
glasses, polished aluminium, etc.)
All signs should be an integral part of the building and not freestanding
attachments.
3. Building form and materials generally on development adjacent to
Parliament Hill should be compatible with those of Parliament House.
(e.g. Grey concrete, red clay brick and off white painted fi nishes have been
found acceptable).
4. Off street parked vehicles should be screened so as not to dominate the
landscape or streetscape.
3

5. It is intended that the landscaped setting of Parliament House and the Public
Offi ces be maintained to punctuate Central City and West Perth development
and that the landscaping of Kings Park, Public Offi ces and Parliament House
grounds be strengthened as a continuous and unifi ed experience.
6. It is also intended that street planting be developed as an extension of the
landscaped reserves, that street trees be used to soften building facades and
that planting in the Freeway reserve be tempered with low planting to protect
desirable views and high planting to screen undesirable views.
7. Plant species in development landscaping is encouraged to compliment the
above landscaping aims.
8. It is desired that all buildings be set back exactly 6.0 metres from the
Parliament Place street boundary on both the north and south sides. The
setback should be landscaped and maintained to the satisfaction of the
Authority. No walls or fences should be located in the setback area.
9. It is desired that all buildings be set back exactly 4.5 metres from the
Havelock Street western boundary except on Lots 1, 2 and 3 of H80 and Lot
30 of H71 which should be set back. exactly 8.75 metres. The setback to be
landscaped and maintained to the satisfaction of the Authority. No walls or
fences should be located in the setback area.
10. Vehicular access to and from areas for vehicle parking is undesirable from
Havelock Street where access exists from another street or right of way.
11. The siting of buildings fronting St. George’s Terrace and on Elder and
Malcolm Streets at the intersection with St. George’s Terrace is to be to the
approval of the Authority.
Generally, it is intended that buildings on Lot 4 of 54 Malcolm Street, Lot 54
Elder Street and Lot 4 of 55 and Lot 13 St. George’s Terrace be set back from
the street boundary and that other buildings in St. George’s Terrace be built
to the street boundary with the street level ground fl oor set back from the
street boundary.
Exact setback dimensions are to be agreed with the Authority.
12. Generally it is desired that development on the Hale School site be set
back at least 50.3 metres from the Harvest Terrace boundary to permit the
retention and reinstatement of the landscaped landform.
13. It is intended that street and park furniture be rationalised to achieve
uniformity throughout the Precinct.
4

CONTROLS
The Parliament House Precinct comprises an Inner and Outer Precinct.
The Perth City Council shall determine all development applications in the
Outer Precinct except those which exceed the height limits. Such development
applications shall be determined by the Authority.
All development applications in the Inner Precinct shall be determined by the
Authority.
5

PROCEDURES
Before submitting a formal application, architects and developers are invited
to discuss their preliminary proposals with offi cers of the Town Planning
Department and also with the Sub Committee. The subsequent procedure is as
follows:
1. The formal application should be submitted with three copies of drawings
etc. to The Metropolitan Region Planning Authority on MRPA Form 1,
through the Perth City Council.
2. The City Council will examine the application and forward it, together with
Council’s recommendations in respect of the City’s planning requirements,
to the Authority for decision.
3. Professional staff of the Town Planning Department will study the
application and the City Council’s recommendations and if necessary confer
with the author of the submission and the City Council.
4. The Sub Committee will meet and consider the application.
The author of a submission is invited to explain his
formal application to the Sub Committee. The Sub Committee’s
report is then put to the Precinct Committee.
5. If the report is favourable, the Chairman of the Precinct Committee
is empowered to recommend the application to the Authority without
convening the full Committee. If the report is unfavourable the full
Committee will meet and in turn make a recommendation to the Authority.
6. The decision of the Authority will be conveyed on MRPA Form 2 to the
applicant and City Council. A building licence cannot be issued until
approval is obtained.
7. In the event of a refusal, or approval with conditions which are
unacceptable to the applicant, an appeal may be made to the Minister for
Planning or the Town Planning Appeal Tribunal in accordance with the
Town Planning and Development Act and the Metropolitan Region Scheme.
8. Before obtaining a building licence from Perth City Council, three copies
of all relevant fi nal working drawings must be submitted to the Authority
for confi rmation of the approval. One copy of the endorsed fi nal working
drawings will be forwarded by the Authority to the Council.
9. Any proposed changes to an approval which affect the external form or
materials of the development must be submitted to the Authority for review.
6

APPLICATIONS
Applications for approval to commence development shall be made in triplicate
in the manner set out in Form 1 to the Metropolitan Region Scheme and the
attached plans shall include the following:
1. A site plan suitably identifi ed with lot numbers, location and names of
streets and rights of way.
All boundary and boundary/building setback dimensions, landscaping,
vehicle entry, egress and parking. Site levels reduced to A.H.D. North point
and scale.
2. All fl oor and roof plans dimensioned and with all uses shown. North point
and scale.
3. All elevations showing heights reduced to A.H.D.
4. Sections suffi cient to show the three dimensional modelling of the
development especially in relationship to the site.
5. An accurate depiction of the form, nature and colours of the development
either by coloured elevations, perspective or model.
6. A statement either on the drawings or separately describing all external
materials and fi nishes including glazing.
7

COMMITTEES
THE PARLIAMENT HOUSE PRECINCT COMMITTEE
This Committee consists of a Chairman selected from the members, the Town
Planning Commissioner, two City Councillors, the Director of the Art Gallery,
the Chairman and a second member of the Joint House Committee of Parliament,
the Principal Architect of the Public Works Department, two nominees of the
Royal Australian Institute of Architects and the Professor of Architecture at the
University of Western Australia.
The Committee is responsible for advising the Authority on develop¬ment
applications and on general design aspects within the Precinct.
THE PARLIAMENT HOUSE PRECINCT SUB COMMITTEE
This Committee consists of the four architect members of the main Committee
and a technical/professional offi cer from each of the Perth City Council and
Town Planning Department. The Sub Committee is assisted by professional staff
of the Town Planning Department and it collaborates with the City Planning
Department of the Perth City Council.
Its functions are to discuss applications with their authors, to examine and report
on applications with regard to policies formu¬lated for the Precinct, to review
policies for the Precinct and to make recommendations to the main Committee.
8

9

10

11