CITY OF FREMANTLE
LOCAL PLANNING POLICY 2.13
SUSTAINABLE BUILDINGS DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
ADOPTION DATE: 27/06/2011
REVISION DATE: 22/05/2019 & 24/07/2019
AUTHORITY: LOCAL PLANNING SCHEME NO.4 & PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 2015
STATUTORY BACKGROUND
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
Schedule 2, Deemed Provisions for local planning schemes, Part 9, Clause 67 - requires
the Local Government to consider a broad range of matters when determining an
application.
Schedule 2, Deemed Provisions for local planning schemes, Part 2 - provide the making of
a local planning policy.
PURPOSE
To establish sustainable building design requirements for new development.
APPLICATION
This policy applies to all development requiring planning approval under the planning
scheme except:
a) Development subject to the provisions of State Planning Policy 7.3 –
Residential Design Codes (R-Codes Volumes 1 and 2);
b) Buildings used for any industrial use class under the heading Industrial Use
Classes in zoning table 2 of the Local Planning Scheme No. 4 (LPS4);
c) Any development with a Gross Lettable Area (GLA) of less than 1000 m² GLA;
d) Refurbishments of existing buildings over 1000m² GLA not involving
substantial structural or internal alteration and all refurbishments to buildings
under 1000m²;
e) Development not involving a physical change to a building;
f) Minor development;
g) Development subject to planning scheme, policy or structure plan provisions
which specify a specific or higher sustainability standard.
(NOTE: This includes Knutsford Street East Structure Plan, LPP 3.1.5. LPP
3.1.5)
POLICY

1. All development subject to this policy shall be designed and constructed in such a
manner so as to demonstrate:
a) A rating not less than 4 Star Green Star using the relevant Green Building
Council of Australia Green Star rating tool, or its equivalent demonstrated
through a report provided by a suitability qualified professional*.
* This may include a One Planet Living Action Plan that is certified by
Bioregional Australia or a One Planet Living Integrator.
2. Council may exercise discretion to waive or vary the requirements of the policy in
the case where:
a) Development involves refurbishment of a building included on the Heritage List
or in a Heritage Area where, in the opinion of the Council, adherence to the
requirements of clause 1 would detrimentally impact on the heritage values of
the building or area; and/or
b) No suitable sustainability rating tool has yet been developed for assessment of
the type of development proposed but it demonstrates a higher than standard
energy and water efficiency.
3. An application subject to this policy shall be accompanied by an outline of how the
policy will be met.
4. Unless the Council waives any particular requirement, an application subject to this
policy may be made subject to a condition of approval that:
a) Prior to the issue of a building permit, the applicant/owner is to submit a copy
of documentation from the Green Building Council of Australia or a suitably
qualified professional stating how the development will achieve a Green Star
rating of at least 4 Stars or equivalent, to the satisfaction of the City of
Fremantle. and
b) Prior to occupation, the applicant/owner is to submit a copy of documentation
from the Green Building Council of Australia or a suitably qualified professional
stating that the development as constructed achieves a Green Star rating of at
least 4 Stars or equivalent, to the satisfaction of the City of Fremantle.
Review information and related documentation
Reviewing officer: Manager Strategic Planning
Policy adopted: 27 June 2011
Policy amended: 24 July 2019 Item Ref SPT1907-3
Legislation: Planning & Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Delegations: NA
Related documents: NA
Next review date: 5 yrs from adoption