P B
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN
PLANNING COMMISSION
ISSN 1324-9142
PLANNINGBULLETIN• WESTERNAUSTRALIA Number 37
February 2000
Draft Model Text arrangements. The Working Group identified on the Scheme Map.
comprises representatives from the Development Areas may
Provisions for
Western Australian Municipal correspond with Development
Structure Plans Association, the Urban Zones or other zones. Development
Development Institute of Australia, Areas, however, need not
the Australian Association of necessarily follow zone and reserve
The purpose of this Bulletin is to Planning Consultants, the Western boundaries and it is possible for
seek comment on draft model text Australian Planning Commission them to overlap different zones and
provisions for structure plans. The and the Ministry for Planning. reserves. The provisions of the
draft provisions are included in special control area apply in
Schedule 1 attached to this Bulletin. The Working Group has so far addition to the provisions applying
Following consideration of completed draft model text to any underlying zone or reserve,
comments and finalisation, it is provisions for structure plans. and the general provisions of the
intended to introduce the draft These are contained in Schedule 1 Scheme.
provisions as regulations. and are now released for comment.
Draft provisions dealing with The scope and content of Structure
development contributions, guided Plans is flexible and depends upon
development schemes and the planning requirements of the
1. Background resumptive development schemes Development Area to which the
are currently being prepared, and it Proposed Structure Plan relates. A
Several local governments are
is intended to release these in Proposed Structure Plan is to
currently introducing provisions
separate Bulletins when they are include such detail as, in the
into schemes which relate to the
ready for public comment. opinion of the local government, is
designation of Development Zones
necessary to satisfy the planning
or Areas; to requirements for the
requirements of the Development
preparation of structure plans
Area. A list of details that may be
(otherwise known as outline 2. Features of Draft Model
included in a Structure Plan is
development plans or Text Provisions for
contained in clause 6.2.4.4.
comprehensive development plans); Structure Plans
and prescribing cost-sharing
The draft model text provisions for
Subdivision and development in a
arrangements between landowners
structure plans provide a single,
Development Area is to generally be
for the provision of common
streamlined process for the
in accordance with the Structure
infrastructure. The provisions,
approval and adoption of structure
Plan that applies to that
however, vary between schemes,
plans. They are based on the special
Development Area.
resulting in costs and delays to local
control area provisions contained in
governments in introducing such the Model Scheme Text(Part 6) and
provisions; difficulties for the A Proposed Structure Plan may be
accordingly, adopt that clause
Commission in assessing and prepared and submitted by a
numbering. References to other
providing advice on the provisions; landowner, landowners or prepared
clauses are references to clauses of
and difficulties for subdividers and by the local government. A
the Model Scheme Text. For
developers who must interpret the Proposed Structure Plan must be
example, clause 6.2.5.5 refers to
provisions. advertised, adopted by the local
‘clause 9.4 of the Scheme.’ This is a
government and approved by the
reference to clause 9.4 of theModel
Western Australian Planning
Following submissions received Scheme Text.
Commission.
from the Urban Development
Institute of Australia and the
Under the draft provisions, a
Australian Association of Planning In an effort to simplify the process
Structure Plan may relate to a
Consultants, a Working Group was for making a Structure Plan, the
Development Area or part of a
established to develop model Commission is not required to
Development Area. The
provisions to deal with structure endorse the local government’s
Development Area is to be
plans and cost-sharing determination that a Proposed
1

Structure Plan is satisfactory for apply to those particular zones and 3. Information and Comment
advertising. However, a decision reserves. This enables the
In summary, the draft provisions
of the local government not to development standards and
set out a clear and consistent
advertise a Proposed Structure Plan, requirements of the Scheme for
procedure for the preparation,
to seek modifications before different forms of development (for
assessment, advertising, approval
advertising or a deemed refusal to example, residential or commercial)
and modification of Structure Plans.
advertise may be considered by the to be incorporated into and apply to
The draft provisions also introduce
Commission at the proponent’s the Structure Plan. However, where
the concept of detailed area plans.
request. An appeal to the Town a provision of a zone or reserve
Planning Appeal Tribunal or the contained in a Structure Plan is
Comments are invited on the draft
Minister for Planning lies from the inconsistent with a provision of the
provisions. These should quote
decision of the Commission on the applicable zone or reserve under the
reference number 853/1/1/17PV
issue of advertising. This avoids the Scheme, the provisions of the
and be addressed to:
proponent having to go through a Scheme prevail. As such, the zones
time consuming and costly appeal and reserves contained in a
Attention: Acting Director
process at the advertising stage Structure Plan, if inconsistent with
Policy and Legislation
when the issues that are the subject the Scheme, must be incorporated
Ministry for Planning
of the dispute have not yet been into the Scheme by amendment or
Albert Facey House
considered by the Commission. as part of the Scheme review
469 Wellington Street
process.
PERTH WA 6000
A Structure Plan is operative once it
has been both adopted by the local Except in relation to the local
Comments should be received by
government under clause 6.2.5.15 government’s decision on detailed
7 April 2000.
and approved by the Commission. area plans and minor changes or
Minor changes or departures from a departures from a Structure Plan, all
CONTACT
Structure Plan may be adopted by appeal rights under clause 6.2.9 are
the local government and notified to in relation to determinations of the
the Commission. Other changes or Commission. Of course,
As part of its continuing
departures must go through the discretionary decisions of the local
improvements to its service to
same process as the making of a government are able to be appealed
customers, clients and the public,
Structure Plan itself. under section 8A of the Town
the Ministry for Planning has
Planning and Development Act 1928.
established a website at the
A detailed area plan may be The introduction of an appeal right
following address:
prepared and submitted under from the Commission’s decision
clause 6.2.7 to enhance, elaborate following a local government http://www.wa.gov.au/planning
and expand on the details or decision was considered The site contains a range of
provisions contained in a Proposed appropriate given that Structure information concerning the
Structure Plan or Structure Plan, as Plans are required to be approved Ministry and the Commission,
an alternative to development by the Commission. This avoids a including Planning Bulletins.
approval under clause 2.5 of the time consuming and costly appeal
Residential Planning Codesor for any process which would be
other planning purpose. In fact, unproductive before the decision of
clause 6.2.7 may operate whether or the Commission is known.
not a Structure Plan or Proposed
Structure Plan exists. A detailed
area plan may include information
considered relevant by the local
government and a list of potential
details is contained in clause 6.2.7.3.
A right of appeal exists from the
local government’s decision
regarding approval of a detailed
area plan, or variation or
modification to a detailed area plan.
The draft provisions enable
Structure Plans to refer to Scheme
zones and reserves. Where they do
so, these in effect incorporate the
provisions of the Scheme as they
2

Schedule 1: DRAFT MODEL TEXT PROVISIONS FOR STRUCTURE PLANS
Part 6 - Special Control Areas
6.1 Operation of special control areas
6.1.1 The following special control areas are shown on the Scheme Map:
(a) Development Areas shown on the Scheme Map as DA with a number and included in Schedule XX.
(b) Development Contribution Areas shown on the Scheme Map as DCA with a number and included in
Schedule XX.
6.1.2 In respect of a special control area shown on a Scheme Map, the provisions applying to the special control
area apply in addition to the provisions applying to any underlying zone or reserve and any general
provisions of the Scheme.
6.2 Development Areas
6.2.1 Interpretation
In clause 6.2, unless the context otherwise requires:
‘Proponent’means any owner or owners of land to which the Proposed Structure Plan relates that has or
have submitted that Proposed Structure Plan;
‘Proposed Structure Plan’means a structure plan, which may apply to either a local area or a district, that has
been prepared in accordance with clause 6.2.4; and
‘Structure Plan’means a Proposed Structure Plan that has been approved by both the Commission and
adopted by the local government under clause 6.2.5.15.
6.2.2 Purpose
(a) To identify areas requiring comprehensive planning prior to subdivision and development.
(b) To coordinate subdivision, land use and development in areas requiring comprehensive planning.
6.2.3 Planning requirements
6.2.3.1 The local government requires a Structure Plan for a Development Area, or for any particular part
or parts of a Development Area, before recommending subdivision or approving development of
land within the Development Area.
6.2.3.2 Where a Structure Plan exists, the subdivision and development of land is to generally be in
accordance with the Structure Plan and any associated provisions contained in Schedule XX.
6.2.3.3 The local government or the Commission may, as a condition of adopting or approving a Proposed
Structure Plan, require a more detailed Structure Plan in future if the local government or the
Commission considers that it will be necessary to provide additional detail to the proposals
contained in the Proposed Structure Plan.
6.2.3.4 Schedule XX describes the Development Areas in more detail and sets out the purpose and
particular requirements that may apply to the Development Area.
6.2.4 Preparation of Structure Plans
6.2.4.1 A Structure Plan may include plans and other documents.
6.2.4.2 A Structure Plan may, with the agreement of the local government, be prepared and implemented
in stages.
3

Schedule 1: DRAFT MODEL TEXT PROVISIONS FOR STRUCTURE PLANS
6.2.4.3 A Structure Plan may relate to only part of a Development Area.
6.2.4.4 A Structure Plan is to contain such detail as, in the opinion of the local government, is required to
satisfy the planning requirements of the Development Area, and, without limiting the generality of
the foregoing, may include the following details:
(a) the area to which the Structure Plan applies;
(b) key opportunities and constraints of the Development Area including landform, topography,
hydrology, landscape, vegetation, soils, conservation and heritage values, ownership, land
use, roads and public transport, and services;
(c) the planning context for the Development Area including the regional and neighbourhood
structure, relevant strategies, Scheme provisions and policies and where appropriate,
indicating how the Proposed Structure Plan is to be integrated into the surrounding area;
(d) proposed major land uses, in particular, residential areas, public open space, school sites,
civic and community uses, commercial uses (including the location and hierarchy of
commercial centres), mixed use, industrial and mixed business uses;
(e) the proposed indicative lot pattern and general location of any major buildings;
(f) estimates of future lots, dwellings, population, employment and retail floor space;
(g) provision for major infrastructure, including main drainage, sewerage, water supply and
other key infrastructure services;
(h) the proposed road network and hierarchy, public transport services, and bicycle and
pedestrian networks;
(i) the timeframe and staging of subdivision and development, and the method of
implementation, including any proposals for funding by development contributions;
(j) details as appropriate relating to:
(i) vehicular access and parking;
(ii) the location, orientation and design of buildings and the space between buildings;
(iii) conservation areas;
(iv) heritage places; and
(v) special development control provisions; and
(k) such other information as may be required by the local government.
6.2.4.5 In considering a Proposed Structure Plan for part of a Development Area, the local government
may require the Proponent to demonstrate how planning for the subject land may be integrated
with planning for the balance of the Development Area, including how broad land uses, essential
services, main movement systems and major conservation and recreation areas are to be integrated
and provide information on the arrangements for implementation.
4

Schedule 1: DRAFT MODEL TEXT PROVISIONS FOR STRUCTURE PLANS
6.2.5 Adoption and approval of Structure Plans
6.2.5.1 A Proposed Structure Plan may be prepared by a Proponent or the local government. Where
prepared by a Proponent, the Proposed Structure Plan is to be submitted to the local government.
6.2.5.2 Upon receiving a Proposed Structure Plan, the local government is to either:
(a) determine that the Proposed Structure Plan is satisfactory for advertising;
(b) determine that the Proposed Structure Plan is not to be advertised until further details have
been provided or modifications undertaken; or
(c) determine that the Proposed Structure Plan is not satisfactory for advertising and give
reasons for this to the Proponent.
6.2.5.3 If within 60 days of receiving a Proposed Structure Plan for approval for advertising, or such longer
period as may be agreed in writing between the Proponent and the local government, the local
government has not made one of the determinations referred to in clause 6.2.5.2, the local
government is deemed to have determined that the Proposed Structure Plan is not satisfactory for
advertising.
6.2.5.4 (a) Where the Proponent is aggrieved by a determination of the local government under
clause 6.2.5.2(b) or (c) or clause 6.2.5.3, the Proponent may request the local government by
notice in writing to forward the Proposed Structure Plan to the Commission.
(b) Within 21 days of receiving a notice from the Proponent under clause 6.2.5.4(a), the local
government is to forward to the Commission:
(i) a copy of the Proposed Structure Plan;
(ii) details of the local government’s determination including any modifications to the
Proposed Structure Plan required by the local government; and
(iii) any other information the local government considers may be relevant to the
Commission’s consideration of approval of the Proposed Structure Plan for advertising.
(c) Upon receiving a Proposed Structure Plan in accordance with clause 6.2.5.4(b), the
Commission is to make one of the determinations referred to in clause 6.2.5.2 and advise the
local government and the Proponent accordingly.
(d) If the Commission requires modifications to the Proposed Structure Plan, the Commission is
to consult with the local government prior to making its determination under clause 6.2.5.4(c).
(e) If within 60 days of receiving a Proposed Structure Plan under clause 6.2.5.4(b), or such
longer period as may be agreed in writing between the Proponent and the Commission, the
Commission has not made one of the determinations referred to in clause 6.2.5.2, the
Commission is deemed to have determined that the Proposed Structure Plan is not
satisfactory for advertising.
5

Schedule 1: DRAFT MODEL TEXT PROVISIONS FOR STRUCTURE PLANS
6.2.5.5 Where the local government, or the Commission under clause 6.2.5.4, has determined that the
Proposed Structure Plan is satisfactory for advertising, the local government is to:
(a) advertise, or require the Proponent to advertise, the Proposed Structure Plan for public
inspection by one or more of the methods of advertising proposals for development as set out
in clause 9.4 of the Scheme; and
(b) give notice or require the Proponent to give notice in writing to:
(i) all landowners affected by the Proposed Structure Plan; and
(ii) such public authorities and other persons as the local government nominates,
and such advertisement and notice are to explain the scope and purpose of the Proposed Structure
Plan, when and where it may be inspected, and invite submissions to the local government by a
specified date being at least 21 days from the date of the notice and advertisement.
6.2.5.6 Within 7 days of determining that a Proposed Structure Plan is satisfactory for advertising, the local
government is to forward a copy of the Proposed Structure Plan to the Commission.
6.2.5.7 The local government is to consider all submissions received and within 60 days of the latest date
specified in the notice under clause 6.2.5.5 is to either:
(a) adopt the Proposed Structure Plan with or without modifications; or
(b) refuse to adopt the Proposed Structure Plan and give reasons for this to the Proponent.
6.2.5.8 If within the 60 day period, or such further time as may be agreed in writing between the
Proponent and the local government, the local government has not made one of the determinations
referred to in clause 6.2.5.7, the local government is deemed to have refused to adopt the Proposed
Structure Plan.
6.2.5.9 Within 21 days of the local government making its determination under clause 6.2.5.7, or deemed
refusal under clause 6.2.5.8, the local government is to forward to the Commission:
(a) a summary of all submissions and comments received by the local government in respect of
the Proposed Structure Plan, and the local government’s decisions or comments in relation to
these;
(b) the local government’s recommendation to the Commission to approve, modify or refuse to
approve the Proposed Structure Plan; and
(c) any other information the local government considers may be relevant to the Commission’s
consideration of the Proposed Structure Plan.
6.2.5.10 The Commission is to either:
(a) approve the Proposed Structure Plan with or without modifications; or
(b) refuse to approve the Proposed Structure Plan and give reasons for its decision to the
Proponent and the local government.
6

Schedule 1: DRAFT MODEL TEXT PROVISIONS FOR STRUCTURE PLANS
6.2.5.11 If within 60 days of receiving the information referred to in clause 6.2.5.9, or such further time as
may be agreed in writing between the Proponent and the Commission, the Commission has not
made one of the determinations referred to in clause 6.2.5.10, the Commission is deemed to have
refused to approve the Proposed Structure Plan.
6.2.5.12 If the Commission approves the Proposed Structure Plan, it is to notify the local government and
the Proponent of its decision within 14 days of the date of the Commission’s decision.
6.2.5.13 If the Commission requires modifications to the Proposed Structure Plan, the Commission is to
consult with the local government prior to approving the Proposed Structure Plan under
clause 6.2.5.10.
6.2.5.14 If the local government, following consultation with the Commission, is of the opinion that any
modification to the Proposed Structure Plan is substantial, the local government may:
(a) readvertise the Proposed Structure Plan; or
(b) require the Proponent to readvertise the Proposed Structure Plan
and, thereafter, the procedures set out in clause 6.2.5.5 onwards are to apply.
6.2.5.15 As soon as practicable after receiving notice of the approval of the Proposed Structure Plan by the
Commission, the local government is to adopt the Proposed Structure Plan and forward a copy of
the Structure Plan to:
(a) the Proponent;
(b) the Commission; and
(c) any other appropriate person or public authority which the local government thinks fit.
6.2.5.16 A Structure Plan is to be kept at the local government’s administrative offices, and is to be made
available for inspection by any member of the public during office hours.
6.2.6 Change or Departure from Structure Plan
6.2.6.1 The local government may adopt a minor change to or departure from a Structure Plan if, in the
opinion of the local government, the change or departure does not materially alter the intent of the
Structure Plan.
6.2.6.2 (a) The local government is to forward a copy of the minor change or departure to the
Commission within 10 days from the date of adopting the minor change or departure.
(b) If the Commission considers that the change or departure adopted by the local government
under clause 6.2.6.1 materially alters the intent of the Structure Plan, then the Commission:
7

Schedule 1: DRAFT MODEL TEXT PROVISIONS FOR STRUCTURE PLANS
(i) may require the local government to follow the procedures set out in clause 6.2.5 in
relation to the change or departure; and
(ii) is to notify the local government of this requirement within 10 days.
6.2.6.3 Any change to or departure from a Structure Plan that is not within clause 6.2.6.1 is to follow the
procedures set out in clause 6.2.5.
6.2.7. Detailed area plans
6.2.7.1 (a) (i) The local government or the Commission may, by notice in writing, require a
person to prepare and submit to the local government a detailed area plan within the
time specified in the notice.
(ii) A person may prepare and submit to the local government a detailed area plan.
(b) A detailed area plan is to relate to a particular lot or lots and may be prepared and submitted:
(i) to enhance, elaborate or expand on the details or provisions contained in a Proposed
Structure Plan or a Structure Plan;
(ii) in place of a development approval required to comply with clause 2.5 of the Residential
Planning Codes; or
(iii) for any other planning purpose.
(c) The local government is to:
(i) approve with or without conditions; or
(ii) refuse to approve
the detailed area plan.
(d) If within 60 days of receiving a detailed area plan under clause 6.2.7.1(a), or such longer
period as may be agreed in writing between the person and the local government, the local
government has not made one of the determinations referred to in clause 6.2.7.1(c), the local
government is deemed to have refused to approve the detailed area plan.
(e) The local government is to forward a copy of the detailed area plan to the Commission within
10 days of approving the detailed area plan.
(f) The local government’s refusal to approve a detailed area plan under clause 6.2.7 is not a
valid reason for the local government to refuse to adopt or the Commission to refuse to
approve a Proposed Structure Plan under clause 6.2.5.
6.2.7.2 Unless clause 6.2.7.1(b)(ii) applies, once approved by the local government, the detailed area plan is
to be used as the basis for:
(a) making recommendations to the Commission on subdivision applications; and
(b) determining development applications
with respect to the land subject to the detailed area plan.
8

Schedule 1: DRAFT MODEL TEXT PROVISIONS FOR STRUCTURE PLANS
6.2.7.3 A detailed area plan may include details as to:
(a) building envelopes;
(b) distribution of land uses within a lot;
(c) private open space;
(d) services;
(e) vehicular access, parking, loading and unloading areas, storage yards and rubbish collection
closures;
(f) the location, orientation and design of buildings and the space between buildings;
(g) advertising signs, lighting and fencing;
(h) landscaping, finished site levels and drainage;
(i) protection of sites of heritage, conservation or environmental significance;
(j) special development controls and guidelines; and
(k) such other information considered relevant by the local government.
6.2.7.4 (a) An approved detailed area plan may be modified or varied with the approval of the local
government, but where there is a related Structure Plan, such modifications or variations
are to conform with the intent of any related Structure Plan.
(b) The local government is to forward a copy of the modification or variation to the detailed
area plan to the Commission within 10 days of approving the modification or variation.
6.2.8 Operation of Structure Plan
6.2.8.1 A Structure Plan commences operation on the date it is adopted by the local government pursuant
to clause 6.2.5.15.
6.2.8.2 Subject to clause 6.2.8.5, if a Structure Plan imposes a classification on the land included in it by
reference to reserves, zones, orResidential Planning Codesthen:
(a) the provisions of the Structure Plan apply to the land as if its provisions were incorporated
into the Scheme and it is binding and enforceable in the same way as corresponding
provisions incorporated in the Scheme; and
(b) provisions in the Scheme applicable to land in those classifications under the Scheme apply
to the Development Area.
6.2.8.3 Without limiting the generality of clause 6.2.8.2, under a Structure Plan:
(a) in the areas designated as zones, the permissibility of uses is to be the same as set out in the
Zoning Table as if those areas were zones under the Scheme having the same designation;
(b) the standards and requirements applicable to the zones and R Codings under the Scheme
apply to the areas having corresponding designations under the Structure Plan;
9

Schedule 1: DRAFT MODEL TEXT PROVISIONS FOR STRUCTURE PLANS
(c) the planning approval procedures including the procedures for the approval of uses and
developments under the Scheme are to apply as if the land were correspondingly zoned or
reserved under the Scheme;
(d) where land is classified as a local reservation, the rights, provisions and procedures, and the
obligations of the local government in regard to compensation set out in clauses 11.5 and 11.6
inclusive apply as if the land were correspondingly reserved under the Scheme; and
(e) any other provision, standard or requirement in the Structure Plan is to be given the same
force and effect as if it were a provision, standard or requirement of the Scheme.
6.2.8.4 A Structure Plan may distinguish between the provisions, requirements or standards which are
intended to have effect as if included in the Scheme, and any provisions, requirements, or standards
which are only for guidance or such other purposes as stipulated in the Structure Plan.
6.2.8.5 If a provision of a Structure Plan which imposes a classification on the land included in it by
reference to reserves, zones orResidential Planning Codesis inconsistent with a provision of the
Scheme, then the provision of the Scheme prevails to the extent of any inconsistency.
6.2.9 Appeal
6.2.9.1 The Proponent may appeal, in accordance with Part V of the Town Planning Act, any:
(a) determination or decision made by the Commission;
(b) requirement imposed by or modification sought by the Commission; or
(c) determinations deemed to have been made by the Commission under clauses 6.2.5.4 or
6.2.5.11
in the exercise of the Commission’s powers under clause 6.2.
6.2.9.2 The Proponent may appeal, in accordance with Part V of the Town Planning Act, any decision
made by the local government under clause 6.2.6.1.
6.2.9.3 A person who has submitted a detailed area plan under clause 6.2.7 may appeal, in accordance with
Part V of the Town Planning Act, any decision made by the local government under clauses 6.2.7.1
or 6.2.7.4.
10