Local Planning
Policy 3.2
Security Screens in the
City Centre Zone
fremantle.wa.gov.au

Security Screens in the City Centre Zone
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. This policy may be cited as Local Planning
Policy 3.2 – Security Screens in the City Centre (LPP 3.2).
Introduction
The local government aims to make the City Centre a welcoming environment 24 hours a
day. The proliferation of security screens along a street creates an oppressive atmosphere
and cultivates the sense that an area is dangerous. The local government aims to balance
the need of individual shopfront security with maintaining open facades that preserve the
day and night amenity of streets in the City Centre.
Objectives
The objectives of this policy are to:
• Ensure a balance between security and a safe, pleasant pedestrian environment.
• Maintain visually attractive, interesting and welcoming streetscapes at all times.
• Protect the integrity of heritage-protected places where security measures are
required.
Application of this Policy
This policy applies to security screens to all buildings on land zoned City Centre under the
City of Fremantle Local Planning Scheme No. 4.
Policy Provisions
Design Elements Policy Provisions
1. Design and Security screens should be:
location a. Unobtrusive; and
b. internal to the building (preferably behind the windows or
door – see Figure 1) or integrated into the shopfront itself
(such as the use of heavy duty bifold clear glass doors)
2. Visual a. Security screens should be at least 80% visually permeable
permeability to allow visibility into the premises at all times.
1/2

b. Solid or predominantly solid security screening, such as
thick grates or roller shutters, are not appropriate.
3. Compatibility Where proposed on a heritage listed building, the materials,
design, installation and location of the security screens should be
compatible with the existing shopfront and the streetscape. For
non-heritage listed buildings, the materials and form of the
security screen are to be in harmony with the nearby historic
shopfronts and the general streetscape.
Figure 1: Example of appropriately designed internal security screens.
Definitions
Security screens means roller shutters, roller doors, metal grills, and the like, which are
typically intended to provide security from break-ins to doors and windows of non-
residential units and are normally utilised during hours the business is closed.
Local Planning Policy – Document Control
Responsible Officer Previous Policy Title Next Review Date
Manager City Planning DE3: Security Doors to (four years)
Shopfronts in the Retail Core
Version Decision to Adopt/Amend Brief Details of Modifications
1 16 December 1985 Adoption
2 11 March 2026 OCM – C2603-6 Update criteria. Modify to WAPC form and manner.
Public Consultation No
WAPC Approval Required? No Date approved by WAPC N/A
2/2