Closure of Pedestrian Accessways Local
Planning Policy
Responsible directorate: Planning and Community Development
Objective: To provide guidance on the assessment criteria to be used for requests to close
pedestrian accessways.
1. Authority:
This Policy has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2 of the deemed provisions
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 which allows the
local government to prepare local planning policies relating to planning and development within
the Scheme area.
2. Application:
This policy applies to all requests for closure of pedestrian accessways within the City of
Joondalup.
3. Definitions:
“major transit terminal” means a multi-nodal public transport terminal, such as a train and bus
terminal.
“pedestrian accessway” means any path in the public domain that is available for use by
pedestrians, and vehicles that are not regulated by the Road Traffic Act 1974 (eg: bicycles,
skateboards, rollerblades). Does not include pedestrian paths provided within road reserves, or
on land zoned Parks and Recreation under the City of Joondalup District Planning Scheme No 2.
“Perth Bicycle Network” means the network of cycling routes across the Perth Metropolitan
Area identified by the Department of Transport, and comprised of local bicycle routes, principal
shared paths and recreational shared paths.
4. Statement:
The provision and maintenance of pedestrian accessways is important in facilitating safe,
convenient and legible pedestrian and cycle movement, particularly in suburban locations
Closure of Pedestrian Accessways 1

designed with cul-de-sacs. Closure shall not be supported, except in particular circumstances,
as described in this policy.
5. Details:
In considering requests for the closure of pedestrian accessways, the following assessments will
be undertaken.
5.1. Urban design assessment:
An urban design assessment will be undertaken to determine the significance of the
pedestrian accessway in the pedestrian and cycle network through the locality.
In conducting the urban design assessment, the following factors will be considered.
5.1.1. Access to community facilities:
Where a pedestrian accessway is considered to provide an important access route
to a community facility, closure shall generally not be supported. Examples of
community facilities include but are not limited to:
• Schools
• Shops
• Public open spaces
• Bus stops
• Libraries
• Churches
• Rail stations
To illustrate the impact that a pedestrian accessway closure may have on access to
community facilities, a walkable catchment diagram in the form of a ped-shed will be
prepared. A 400-metre catchment applies to a pedestrian accessway close to
community facilities; and 800 metres, where the pedestrian accessway is close to an
Activity Centre identified in State Planning Policy 4.2: Activity Centres for Perth and
Peel or a major transit terminal.
5.1.2. Availability of alternative access routes:
A safe, clear and direct alternative route must exist which provides access to
community services and facilities.
5.1.3. Relationship to the pedestrian network:
Closure of a pedestrian accessway which forms part of a key pedestrian network will
not be supported where it forms part of:
• a continuous pedestrian network; or
Closure of Pedestrian Accessways 2

• a Perth Bicycle Network or similar.
Following completion of the urban design assessment, the importance of the
pedestrian accessway will be rated as either “low”, “medium” or “high” as set out in
Table 1.
5.2. Nuisance impact assessment:
A nuisance impact assessment will be undertaken to substantiate claims of nuisance
behaviour occurring within the pedestrian accessway.
The City will assess the following types of evidence:
a. Evidence provided by the person(s) making the request for closure.
b. Evidence provided by relevant agencies/organisations (eg: Western Australian
Police).
c. Evidence provided by the City records (eg: Rangers, City Watch).
In conducting the nuisance impact assessment, the following factors will be considered in
relation to nuisance behaviour:
a. Frequency of occurrence
b. Number of offences
c. Nature of offences
Following completion of the nuisance impact assessment, the level of nuisance occurring
on the pedestrian accessway will be rated as either “low”, “medium” or “high” as set out in
Table 1.
5.3. Community impact assessment:
A community impact assessment of the use of the pedestrian accessway will be
undertaken to gather information from surrounding residents in order to determine the level
of use by the local community.
Comments will be sought for a period of 30 days and will consist of letters and
questionnaires to all landowners within a 400-metre radius of the subject pedestrian
accessway.
The following additional consultation may also be undertaken, if considered necessary by
the local government:
• Insertion of notices in the local newspaper.
• Liaison with local community groups.
• On-site assessment(s) to count pedestrian and cyclist movement through the subject
pedestrian accessway.
Access for disabled persons and seniors will be given special consideration, as the impact
of the pedestrian accessway closure on these groups is likely to be greater.
Closure of Pedestrian Accessways 3

Following completion of the Community Impact Assessment, the pedestrian accessway’s
level of use will be rated as either “low”, “medium” or “high” as set out in Table 1.
5.4. Referral to State Government and service agencies:
Requests for closure of pedestrian accessways will be referred to State Government and
service agencies, including:
• Landgate (who are also to provide a land purchase price to be met by abutting
landowners)
• Water Corporation
• Western Power
• Telstra
• ATCO Gas
Comments received from State Government and service agencies will determine if
essential services (ie: sewer mains) are located within the pedestrian accessway and
whether or not these services need to be relocated and/or an easement put in place,
should closure be supported. Comments can also be made for or against the proposal.
5.5. Final assessment:
The results of each individual assessment will enable a final determination to be made via
cross-analysis. Scenarios where closure of a pedestrian accessway will be supported or
not supported are provided in Table 2.
5.5.1. Referral to the Western Australian Planning Commission:
The results of the final assessment will be presented to Council for consideration.
Where Council supports closure of a pedestrian accessway, a full copy of the closure
report will be referred to the Western Australian Planning Commission for
determination.
5.6. Reconsideration of decision:
Where Council has considered a request to close a pedestrian accessway and has
determined that the pedestrian accessway should remain open, Council’s decision is final
and will only be reconsidered where it is clearly demonstrated that the assessment has not
been in accordance with the provisions of this policy. In the absence of a reconsideration
being heard by Council, a new request for closure may be submitted no less than 18
months from the date of Council’s decision.
In circumstances where Council supports closure of a pedestrian accessway but, the
Western Australian Planning Commission does not support closure, Council may request
that the Commission reconsider its decision.
For a request for reconsideration to be initiated, all landowners abutting the pedestrian
accessway are required to make a joint request, with the request being supported by “new
information” that addresses the matters raised by the Commission in its decision. Council
will then consider the request and forward the decision to the Western Australian Planning
Commission for reconsideration.
Closure of Pedestrian Accessways 4

Once the Western Australian Planning Commission has determined the request for
reconsideration no further requests can be made. The City will consider a new request for
closure no less than 18 months of the date of the Commission’s decision on the
reconsideration.
5.7. Alternatives to closure:
The results of each individual assessment will enable a final determination to be made via
cross-analysis. Scenarios where closure of a pedestrian accessway will be supported or
not supported are provided in Table 2.
5.7.1. Request made on the grounds of nuisance behaviour:
Where a determination is made not to support a request for closure, which was
submitted on the grounds of nuisance behaviour, Council may consider upgrading
the subject pedestrian accessway. Such improvements may include:
• improvements to lighting;
• improvements to appearance; and/or
• increased security patrols.
5.7.2. Request made on the grounds of security:
Where a determination is made not to support a request for closure and a significant
security problem is shown to exist for dwellings abutting the pedestrian accessway,
Council will give consideration to alternatives or initiatives raised by landowners
abutting the subject pedestrian accessway. Options raised shall only be considered
where the proposal is:
• considered to significantly improve security;
• supported by abutting landowners;
• deemed to have no significant negative impact on the amenity of the
surrounding area; and
• deemed to have no adverse impact on traffic management.
Closure of Pedestrian Accessways 5

Creation date: April 2001 (CJ318-09/01)
Formerly: Pedestrian Accessways Policy
Amendments: CJ085-04/04, CJ256-11/12, CJ118-08/20
Last reviewed: August 2020 (CJ118-08/20)
Related documentation: • City of Joondalup Local Planning Scheme No 3
• State Planning Policy 4.2 — Activity Centres for Perth and Peel
• Road Traffic Act 1974
File reference: 57155
Closure of Pedestrian Accessways 6

Table 1. Impact assessment
Importance Urban design Nuisance Community Impact
High • Pedestrian accessway provides a direct • There is a high and consistent frequency • A significant portion of respondents are
route to community facilities. in the occurrence of criminal activity not in favour of closure (over 50%).
• A safe alternative route does not exist. and/or nuisance behaviour, compared to • A high portion of households use the
• Pedestrian accessway is part of a elsewhere in the suburb. pedestrian accessway regularly.
continuous pedestrian accessway link or • The number of different types of • A high portion of users will be
a key pedestrian network. occurrences is high and is directly inconvenienced by closure (over 50%).
related to the pedestrian accessway.
• The severity of criminal activity and/or
nuisance behaviour is considered higher
than elsewhere in the suburb.
• Occurrences of nuisance behaviour are
substantiated by questionnaire
respondents.
Medium • Pedestrian accessway provides a route • There are frequent occurrences of • A medium portion of respondents are not
to community facilities, but not directly. criminal activity and nuisance behaviour, in favour of closure (over 30%).
• An alternative route exists but is some compared to elsewhere in the suburb. • A medium portion of households use the
inconvenience. • There are several different types of pedestrian accessway regularly.
• Pedestrian accessway is not of a occurrences of nuisance behaviour that • A medium portion of users will be
continuous pedestrian accessway or a are directly related to the pedestrian inconvenienced by closure (30–50%).
key pedestrian network. accessway.
• The severity of criminal activity and/or
nuisance behaviour is considered higher
than elsewhere in the suburb.
Low • Pedestrian accessway is not linked to • Occurrence of criminal or nuisance • A high portion of residents are in favour
any community facility. behaviour is similar to elsewhere in the of closure (over 70%).
• A safe, reasonable alternative walkway suburb. • A low portion of households use the
exists. • Types of offences are limited to nuisance pedestrian accessway regularly.
• Pedestrian accessway is not part of a behaviour. • A low portion of users will be
key pedestrian network. • The severity of nuisance behaviour is inconvenienced by closure (less than
similar to elsewhere in the suburb. 30%).
Closure of Pedestrian Accessways 7

Table 2. Cross-analysis of assessments
Urban design Nuisance Community impact Supported/not supported
High High, medium or low High, medium or low Not supported
Medium Low Low Not supported
Medium High or medium Low Supported
Medium High Medium Supported
Medium Low Low Not supported
Medium Medium or low Medium Not supported
Low High, medium or low Low or medium Supported
Low High, medium or low High Not supported
Closure of Pedestrian Accessways 8