STATE PLANNING
POLICY 7.2
PRECINCT DESIGN
Gazetted 19 February 2021

The Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage acknowledges the traditional owners and custodians of this land. We pay our respect to
Elders past and present, their descendants who are with us today, and those who will follow in their footsteps.
Disclaimer © State of Western Australia
This document has been produced by the Department of
Published by the
Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western Australian
Western Australian Planning Commission
Planning Commission. Any representation, statement, opinion or
advice expressed or implied in this publication is made in good
Gordon Stephenson House
faith and on the basis that the Government, its employees and
140 William Street
agents are not liable for any damage or loss whatsoever which
Perth WA 6000
may occur as a result of action taken or not taken, as the case may
Locked Bag 2506
be, in respect of any representation, statement, opinion or advice
Perth WA 6001
referred to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before
applying the information contained in this document to particular
Version 1 published December 2020
circumstances.
website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
tel: 08 6551 8002
fax: 08 6551 9001
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
This document is available in alternative formats on application to
the Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage Communications
branch at media@dplh.wa.gov.au.

Contents
1. Citation 1
2. Policy Intent 1
3. Precinct Design in Western Australia 1
4. Application of this Policy 1
5. Policy Objectives 2
6. Policy Outcomes 2
7. Policy Measures 3

1. CITATION 4. APPLICATION OF THIS
POLICY
This is a State Planning Policy made under Part 3 of the
Planning and Development Act 2005. This policy may be cited
as State Planning Policy 7.2 Precinct Design (SPP 7.2). This policy and its guidelines applies to precincts throughout
Western Australia and guides the preparation, assessment,
determination and implementation of precinct structure plans,
local development plans, and subdivision and development
2. POLICY INTENT applications. For detailed guidance on the application and
implementation of this policy, the policy is to be read in
conjunction with the SPP 7.2 Precinct Design Guidelines (the
To provide guidance on the design, planning, assessment and
Precinct Design Guidelines).
implementation of precinct structure plans, local development
plans, subdivision and development in areas identified as
precincts.
4.1 WHAT IS A PRECINCT?
Precincts are areas that require a higher level of planning and
3. PRECINCT DESIGN IN
design focus due to their complexity, whether this is due to
mixed use components, quality public transport infrastructure,
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
higher levels of density, an activity centre designation or
character, heritage and/or ecological value.
Effective planning and design of areas of urban activity and
optimising available resources is integral to the future of our The following are general precinct types where this policy may
cities and towns. Western Australia’s population is predicted be applied (but are not limited to):
to reach 3.2 million by 2031 and some 85 per cent of people
– Activity centres as defined by draft SPP 4.2 Activity
will live in urban areas.
Centres (WAPC, 2020)
The accommodation of this further growth needs to be – Station precincts (land within and around a commuter train
orientated towards precincts of activity, transit and places station or major bus interchange)
which can accommodate increased intensity of development.
– Urban corridors (land adjacent to and located along transit
corridors)
The Western Australian planning system and policy framework
has traditionally been weighted towards low density greenfield – Residential and/or mixed use areas or
development. This policy recognises the need to design and – Areas otherwise identified as a precinct by the Western
plan for a broader range of precinct-based contexts and Australian Planning Commission (WAPC), in consultation
conditions, including: activity centres, stations, urban corridors, with local government, for purposes of orderly and proper
and infill areas. This complements the existing guidance planning.
provided for greenfield developments and provides additional
information concerning infill development.
Activity centres, stations, urban corridors, and higher density
residential and/or mixed use areas inherently have more
variables and considerations. It is therefore essential that
these areas are carefully planned, designed and developed to
achieve good built environment outcomes.
1 State Planning Policy 7.2: Precinct Design

5. POLICY OBJECTIVES
The objectives of this policy are to: 3. Built form height and massing (bulk and scale) across
the precinct is responsive to existing built form,
1. Ensure that precinct planning and design processes topography, key views and landmarks, and the intended
accommodate growth in a coordinated manner and future character of the area. Buildings are suited to their
deliver good quality built environment outcomes that purpose, contribute positively to the character of the
provide social, economic and environmental benefits. public realm, and provide good amenity at ground level.
2. Ensure consistency and rigour of precinct planning 4. The precinct design facilitates development that
across the State. meets the needs and expectations of the community
3. Enable design review to be incorporated in precinct and provides for change over time. Required services
planning processes, with due regard given to the advice infrastructure is integrated in a manner that mitigates
received. amenity impacts. Development considers the intended
full lifecycle and is robust, resilient to wear and easy to
maintain over time.
5. Planning and development of precincts delivers a
6. POLICY OUTCOMES sustainable built environment through:
• passive environmental design measures
In the context of State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of the • water sensitive urban design
Built Environment (WAPC, 2019)(SPP 7.0) Design Principles, • enhancement of the green network
the outcomes listed below specify the role of planning and
• harnessing opportunities for renewable energy
development in contributing to the overall objectives of this
sources and precinct-wide energy savings
policy. The outcomes can be achieved through addressing the
• adaptive reuse of existing structures where
policy measures and meeting the objectives in the Precinct
feasible
Design Guidelines. They can be used to guide discretion in
policy application and provide a basis for its evaluation. • promotion of active and public transport modes.
6. The precinct design provides for comfortable public
1. The precinct design responds to and enhances the
spaces that encourage physical activity, enable a range
distinctive characteristics of a local area, contributing
of uses and are accessible to all.
to a sense of place. New development is integrated
7. The precinct design provides for places that are easy to
into its setting and responds positively to the intended
navigate, with clear connections, good lines of sight to
future character of an area.
key locations and a logical, intuitive layout.
2. Development within precincts integrates landscape
8. Planning and development optimises safety and
design that enhances sustainability outcomes and
security within precincts by:
contributes to community wellbeing. The local
environment is enhanced through the: • maximising opportunities for passive surveillance
• protection of water and soil resources • integrating safety requirements in manner that
does not compromise intended uses
• retention and/or enhancement of the green
network • following Crime Prevention through
Environmental Design (CPTED) design principles.
• protection and/or restoration of fauna habitat,
where appropriate 9. The precinct design provides for development that
responds to local community needs and the wider
• consideration of microclimate and urban heat
social context by delivering an appropriate mix of land
island impacts.
uses, dwelling types and public spaces.
10. The precinct is attractive and inviting, with a coherent
identity and cultural relevance. The scale, arrangement,
articulation and material quality of buildings and spaces
together create a high level of amenity.
State Planning Policy 7.2: Precinct Design 2

7. POLICY MEASURES
7.1 STRATEGIC PLANNING 7.3 EXEMPTIONS
Strategic planning documents within the State Planning The decision-maker will generally not require a precinct
Framework, including region schemes; regional and subregional structure plan to be prepared over an area where there is
strategies and frameworks; local planning strategies; and already an endorsed structure plan or activity centre plan.
district and local structure plans, should include consideration
A draft structure plan, activity centre plan, scheme amendment
of this policy when identifying or investigating planning areas
or local development plan (or any amendment to these) that
for future development.
would ordinarily make reference to this policy, may only be
For activity centres, additional factors such as the finalised without reference to this policy, where:
identification of the centre’s role, distribution, function and
1. it has been advertised in accordance with the
broad land use should be considered as part of the strategic
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
planning process in accordance with draft SPP 4.2 Activity
Regulations 2015 prior to the gazettal of this policy or
Centres (WAPC, 2020).
2. unless otherwise determined by the WAPC.
7.2 PLANNING PROPOSALS
7.4 DESIGN REVIEW
This policy is relevant to precinct structure plans, local
development plans, subdivision and development. These Where available, design review benefits precinct planning by
planning proposals are to be prepared and determined providing informed, independent advice regarding the design
in accordance with this policy and the Precinct Design quality of a precinct proposal and the interpretation and
Guidelines. application of the Precinct Design Guidelines. Design review
can be particularly helpful for unique or complex proposals.
Precinct structure plan: a document prepared and approved
under the provisions of a local planning scheme. Precinct Design review is carried out against the Design Principles
structure plans outline land use, density and development contained within SPP 7.0 Design of the Built Environment
(including built form), access arrangements, infrastructure, (WAPC, 2019). Consideration will also be given to the
environmental assets and community facilities at a precinct objectives outlined within the Precinct Design Guidelines,
scale to facilitate future subdivision and development. noting that these align with the Design Principles.
Local development plan: a mechanism that may be used in Design review shall be scaled according to the complexity
limited situations to facilitate the design and coordination or significance of a proposal and shall generally follow the
of development where detailed built form, public realm and methodology outlined in the Design Review Guide (WAPC,
access guidance is needed, but is not to be used to guide 2019) to achieve consistency across jurisdictions. It is
subdivision and zoning or to allocate residential density codes. expected that decision-makers give due regard to the advice
A local development plan may only apply to specific lots, a and any recommendations provided.
group of lots or to a small defined area, such as a local activity
centre. SPP 7.0 Design of the Built Environment, the Design Review
Guide and the Precinct Design Guidelines provide further
Subdivision and development: where an endorsed precinct information regarding design review.
structure plan or local development plan exists, subdivision
and development should be consistent with the applicable
plan.
In considering subdivision or development proposals within a
precinct where a precinct structure plan or local development
plan has not yet been prepared, the responsible authority
should also consider the objectives, measures and outcomes
of this policy, the objectives and considerations of the Precinct
Design Guidelines, and any other relevant requirements.
3 State Planning Policy 7.2: Precinct Design



