Department of Planning,
Lands and Heritage
State Planning Policy 2.4
Planning for
Basic Raw Materials
July 2021
Prepared under Section 26 of the Planning and Development Act
2005 by the Western Australian Planning Commission

click to follow
1 CITATION 1
2 POLICY INTENT 1
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the 3 BASIC RAW MATERIALS
Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage (BRM) IN WESTERN
on behalf of the Western Australian Planning AUSTRALIA 1
Commission. Any representation, statement,
opinion or advice expressed or implied in this 3.1 Supply categories for BRM 1
publication is made in good faith and on the
basis that the Government, its employees and
4 APPLICATION OF
agents are not liable for any damage or loss
THIS POLICY 2
whatsoever which may occur as a result of
action taken or not taken, as the case may be, 4.1 BRM resources mapping 2
in respect of any representation, statement,
opinion or advice referred to herein. 4.2 Policy exemptions 2
Professional advice should be obtained before
applying the information contained in this
5 POLICY OBJECTIVES 2
document to particular circumstances.
6 POLICY MEASURES 3
© Western Australian Planning Commission 6.1 Higher order strategic
planning instruments 3
Published by the
Western Australian Planning Commission 6.2 Local planning
Gordon Stephenson House instruments 3
140 William Street
6.3 Subdivision and
Perth WA 6000
development 3
Locked Bag 2506
6.4 Development within
Perth WA 6001
Significant Geological
Publication date: 16/07/2021 Supply or Extraction Sites 3
Operational date: 16/07/2021
Gazettal date: 16/07/2021 6.5 Development approval
and management plans 4
website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
DEFINITIONS 5
tel: 08 6551 8002
fax: 08 6551 9001
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
This document is available in alternative
formats on application to Communication
Services.

State Planning Policy 2.4
1
Planning for Basic Raw Materials
July 2021
1 CITATION 3 BASIC RAW MATERIALS IN 3.1 Supply categories for Basic Raw
WESTERN AUSTRALIA Materials
This is a State Planning Policy made under Part 3 of the
Planning and Development Act 2005. The policy may be BRM are a finite resource and their efficient use is required This policy recognises the following site categories for
cited as State Planning Policy 2.4 Planning for Basic Raw to ensure an ongoing supply to support economic BRM:
Materials (SPP 2.4). development in Western Australia.
• Significant Geological Supplies (SGS) - are identified as
Essential for the construction of buildings, roads, other the highest priority extraction areas for BRM. SGS are
infrastructure and agricultural production, for the BRM identified by the Department of Mines, Industry
2 POLICY INTENT
purposes of this policy BRM are: Regulation and Safety (DMIRS) that represent strategic,
long-term supplies of BRM requiring protection.
To ensure basic raw materials (BRM) and extractive • sand (including silica sand)
industries matters are considered during planning • Extraction Sites (ES) - comprise all commercial sites
• clay
and development decision-making, to facilitate the from which BRM are extracted, and quarries. These
responsible extraction and use of the State’s BRM • hard rock (including dimension stone) may overlap with SGS areas. ES may include future,
resources. proposed, approved and operating commercial
• limestone (including metallurgical limestone)
extractive industries under the Planning and
• agricultural lime Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015,
the Local Government Act 1995, the Mining Act 1978 or a
• gravel
combination of these Acts.
• gypsum
The identification of BRM under these categories does not
obligate the landowner to extract these resources, nor
• other construction and road building materials
that government approvals for extraction is guaranteed.
• materials which may substitute BRM.
The extraction of BRM on freehold land is recognised as an
extractive industry under the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. Extractive
industry proposals on freehold land require development
approval from the relevant local government.
Extractive industry proposals on Crown Land are regulated
under the Mining Act 1978 and require a granted mining
tenement.

State Planning Policy 2.4
2
Planning for Basic Raw Materials
July 2021
4 APPLICATION OF THIS • Significant Geological Supply (SGS) areas 5 POLICY OBJECTIVES
POLICY
• known, proposed, approved or operating extraction
The objectives of this policy are to:
sites (ES)
SPP 2.4 should be read in conjunction with the Planning
(a) ensure BRM and its regional importance is considered
for BRM guidelines (the BRM guidelines). This policy and • exclusion areas – known or proposed sites excluded
at the earliest stages of the planning process;
BRM guidelines apply to the preparation and assessment from BRM extraction due to environmental values,
of planning instruments, including region and local resource conflicts or for land use planning reasons. (b) protect BRM in SGS areas and ES by avoiding
planning schemes; planning strategies, structure plans; encroachment from incompatible land uses;
GeoVIEW.WA mapping provides more detail on the
subdivision and development proposals in Western
(c) ensure BRM resources are used efficiently in land use
boundaries of SGS, ES and exclusion areas for the Perth
Australia where:
planning and development;
and Peel regions than for other regions. Outside the Perth
(a) proposals are over, or adjacent to, sites identified to
and Peel regions, SGS areas and known ES are identified (d) identify BRM extraction opportunities through
contain BRM resources
by the presence of geological resources and mining sequential land use without compromising the final
(b) significant volumes of fill may be required tenements. intended land use; and
(c) approval is required for extractive industries under The BRM resource mapping will be updated over time. (e) ensure the extraction of BRM avoids, minimises or
the Planning and Development Act 2005 It is not possible to include all ES, due to constraints mitigates any adverse impacts on the community,
in accessing information, as well as the fact that some water resources and biodiversity values.
(d) extractive industry proposals are assessed under the
ES are only in operation for short periods of time, and
Mining Act 1987 and due regard is given to planning
their operation may commence and cease in between
instruments by the decision-maker.
mapping updates.
This policy is to be considered in conjunction with the
interactive geological map GeoVIEW.WA, as well as 4.2 Policy exemptions
other relevant legislation and policies as outlined in the
associated BRM guidelines. This policy does not apply to:
State Planning Policy 2.5 Rural Planning (SPP 2.5) addresses (a) mining matters in accordance with the Mining Act
BRM matters on rural land. Until such time as SPP 2.5 is 1978
reviewed, where there is a conflict between SPP 2.5 and
(b) areas subject to State Agreement Acts
this policy in relation to BRM matters, this policy prevails to
the extent of any inconsistency. (c) the dredging of material from the bed of tidal waters
under the Mining Act 1978
4.1 Basic raw materials resources mapping
(d) extraction of BRM for public works as deemed
necessary by local governments under the Local
This policy operates in association with the interactive
Government Act 1995.
geological map (GeoVIEW.WA) produced by DMIRS.
The GeoVIEW.WA identifies:

State Planning Policy 2.4
3
Planning for Basic Raw Materials
July 2021
6 POLICY MEASURES 6.2 Local planning instruments (b) that transitional and interface land uses are
compatible and should;
Planning decisions that impact on, or are impacted Local planning strategies, schemes and local structure
i. have due regard for existing and future
by, BRM operations should comply with the following plans (including any amendments to these documents)
settlement patterns as described in local
measures. should, where appropriate:
planning instruments;
(a) identify SGS areas, their separation distances and
6.1 Higher order strategic planning ii. have due regard for the existing BRM operations
establish transitional land uses and interface areas to:
instruments and consultation with land owners;
i. protect known BRM SGS areas and ES from
iii. have regard for relevant documents as outlined
Higher order strategic planning documents such as region encroachment by incompatible land uses;
in the associated BRM guidelines;
schemes, regional and sub-regional frameworks, their
ii. avoid any health risks or amenity implications for
amendments, plus sub-regional and district structure iv. require a ‘notification on title’ advising of the
adjacent land uses;
plans should, where appropriate: proximity and location of existing or potential
(b) not compromise the extraction of resources on SGS future extractive industry activity and potential
(a) identify SGS areas as the primary sources for BRM and
areas and ES; adverse impacts resulting from the activity;
define known exclusion areas;
(c) require an approved structure plan where future (c) how subdivision and development of land will
(b) avoid and/or minimise the potential negative
urban or industrial land is proposed for BRM minimise imported fill through consideration of
impacts on amenity and the environment arising
extraction areas and sequential land use that site-responsive design, bulk earthworks, drainage
from an extractive industry, when identifying areas
demonstrates land staging and site remediation planning and alternative construction methods; and
for future growth;
including identification of finished ground levels;
(d) the application of vertical separation distances to
(c) avoid and/or minimise encroachment on identified
(d) seek to locate new urban and industrial areas on groundwater and other management measures to
BRM resources and extractive industry operations
land where the need for additional imported fill is protect water resources where an extractive industry
when identifying areas for future growth;
minimised; and is proposed.
(d) identify opportunities for the extraction of BRM
(e) require proposals for subdivision to minimise
from SGS areas followed by sequential urban or 6.4 Development within Significant
imported BRM for new urban and industrial areas.
industrial development, where appropriate. There is Geological Supply or Extraction Sites
a presumption against region scheme amendments
6.3 Subdivision and development
until it is demonstrated how sequential land use Applications for development approval for activities not
will be achieved where a BRM resource has been related to BRM extraction in SGS or ES areas should be
Subdivision and development applications should
identified; and assessed to determine whether:
demonstrate:
(e) seek to locate new urban and industrial areas on (a) a proposal will impact on current or future BRM
(a) that land uses are compatible by avoiding sensitive
land where the need for additional imported fill is extraction operations;
land uses within SGS areas and/or extraction site
minimised.
separation distances as outlined in the EPA Guidance (b) a subject site is identified in regional or sub-regional
Statement No 3 – Separation Distances between frameworks, sub-regional or local planning strategies
Industrial and Sensitive Land Uses; for another purpose; and

State Planning Policy 2.4
4
Planning for Basic Raw Materials
July 2021
(c) development results in an increase in the number
of people living, working or congregating within a
defined separation distance.
6.5 Development approval and
management plans
Unless exempt, applications to establish, extend or expand
an extractive industry require development approval
under an applicable local planning scheme. Applications
for development approval should be supported by a
management plan that demonstrates:
(a) site description and analysis;
(b) strategic and statutory planning requirements;
(c) identification of the environmental values and those
requiring protection;
(d) that extractive industry operations are adhering to
designated separation distances and will not impact
or be impacted by sensitive land uses;
(e) proposed transport routes used and site access
details;
(f) sequential land use and a staging plan for the
rehabilitation of the site for its intended long-term
use; and
(g) compliance with any other considerations as outlined
in the BRM guidelines.

State Planning Policy 2.4
5
Planning for Basic Raw Materials
July 2021
DEFINITIONS (i) land reserved for mining or commons; (extractive) industries under the Planning and Development
Act 2005, the Local Government Act 1995, the Mining Act
(ii) land reserved and designated for public utility for
The terms used in this policy complement those 1978 or a combination of these legislations. They may
any purpose under the Land Administration Act
contained in the Planning and Development (Local Planning occur wholly or partly within or outside of SGS areas.
1997;
Schemes) Regulations 2015 Model Scheme Text. Where they occur outside of SGS areas, they provide
The following additional definitions apply within this (b) land that has been lawfully granted or contracted important local supplies and in some cases, provide for a
policy: to be granted in fee simple by or on behalf of the specific market niche over the short to medium term.
Crown;
Basic raw materials (BRM) Industry – extractive
(c) land that is subject to any lease granted by or on
For this policy, BRM means: behalf of the Crown other than — Means premises, other than premises used for mining
• sand (including silica sand1) (i) a pastoral lease within the meaning of the Land operations, that are used for the extraction of BRM
Administration Act 1997, or a lease otherwise including by means of ripping, blasting or dredging and
• clay2 granted for grazing purposes only; or may include facilities for any of the following purposes:
• hard rock (including dimension stone) (ii) a lease for timber purposes; or (a) the processing of raw materials including crushing,
screening, washing, blending or grading;
• limestone (including metallurgical limestone) (iii) a lease of Crown land for the use and benefit of
the Aboriginal inhabitants; (b) activities associated with the extraction of
• agricultural lime
BRM including wastewater treatment, storage,
(d) land that is a townsite within the meaning of the
rehabilitation, loading, transportation, maintenance
• gravel
Land Administration Act 1997.
and administration.
• gypsum
Exclusion areas
Interface
• other construction and road building materials
Exclusion areas contain known BRM resources but are
A point where different types of land uses meet or are in
• materials which may substitute BRM.
considered unfavourable for excavation. These areas
close proximity.
are likely to have protected environmental values or are
Crown land excluded for planning or infrastructure reasons. There Note: Planning needs to manage this interface in
is a presumption against approval of extraction in these situations where conflict may arise from the activities from
Crown land means all land except:
locations. one land use that affects others. Therefore, land uses at
(a) land that has been reserved for or dedicated to any the point of interface need to be compatible.
public purpose other than — Extraction sites (ES)
Rehabilitation
ES comprise all commercial extraction areas for BRM and
BRM quarries used by government for infrastructure. Refers to activities related to site restoration during or
1 The Mining Act 1978 covers silica, mineral and garnet sand on most
land holdings – except certain pre-1899 land titles that hold Mineral to ES include operating, approved and proposed commercial following BRM extraction activities. Rehabilitation will
Owner rights. consider short-term requirements, the intended final
2 The Mining Act 1978 covers kaolin, bentonite, attapulgite and
montmorillonite clays on all land holdings

State Planning Policy 2.4
6
Planning for Basic Raw Materials
July 2021
(sequential) land use of the site and conditions placed on Significant Geological Supplies (SGS)
operations. This should consider landform and finished
SGS are BRM areas identified by the Department of
floor levels, groundwater protection, management of air
Mines, Industry, Regulation and Safety (DMIRS) as having
and water erosion, and future infrastructure requirements.
State significance due to the size of the resource, relative
Separation distances scarcity, demand and/or location near growth areas and
transport routes.
A separation distance is the distance recommended by
the Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) to separate Special Control Areas
a source of emissions from sensitive land uses. Separation
Special control areas (SCA) are intended to control a type
distances are determined in accordance with the EPA
of development which does not generally occur within
Guidance Statement No.3 - Separation Distances between
a zone or reserve. The control may apply to only part
Industrial and Sensitive Land Uses and should guide the
of a zone or reserve or may overlap zone and reserve
establishment of transitional land uses that ensure the
boundaries.
protection of community health, safety and amenity.
The separation distance has been established as the Transitional land uses
shortest distance between the boundary of an impacting
land use (such as industrial) and the boundary of a Within the separation distance a series of transitioning
sensitive land use (residential, for example). land uses may be used to transition between the
impacting land use (for example, emitting noise,
Separation distances provide protection to sensitive land
vibration, dust, odour etc) and sensitive land use being
uses from an impacting land use but also protect the
separated. Transitional land uses should be compatible
impacting land use from encroachment of incompatible
and/or synergistic with adjacent land uses. There may
land uses.
be multiple interfaces within the separation distance
depending on the number of transitional land uses.
Sensitive land use
Transport impact assessment
Sensitive land uses comprise land uses that are residential
or institutional in nature, where people live or regularly
A transport impact assessment (TIA) determines the types
spend extended periods of time. These include dwellings,
and level of transport-related impacts on the community
short-stay accommodation, schools, hospitals and
and amenity that may be generated from development
childcare centres and generally exclude commercial or
and necessary mitigation actions. TIA guidelines support
industrial premises.
transport planning information, the level of information
required and the format in which it should be presented
for consideration.