STATE PLANNING
POLICY 7.0
DESIGN OF THE BUILT
ENVIRONMENT
For a Better
Built Environment

The Department of Planning, Lands and
Heritage acknowledges the traditional owners
and custodians of this land. We pay our
© State of Western Australia
respect to Elders past and present, their
descendants who are with us today, and Published by the
those who will follow in their footsteps. Western Australian Planning Commission
Disclaimer Gordon Stephenson House
140 William Street
This document has been produced by the Perth WA 6000
Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage Locked Bag 2506
on behalf of the Western Australian Planning Perth WA 6001
Commission. Any representation, statement,
Version 1 published February 2019
opinion or advice expressed or implied in this
publication is made in good faith and on the website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
basis that the Government, its employees and email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
agents are not liable for any damage or loss tel: 08 6551 8002
whatsoever which may occur as a result of fax: 08 6551 9001
action taken or not taken, as the case may be, National Relay Service: 13 36 77
in respect of any representation, statement,
This document is available in alternative formats
opinion or advice referred to herein.
on application to the Department of Planning,
Professional advice should be obtained before
Lands and Heritage Communications branch at
applying the information contained in this
media@dplh.wa.gov.au.
document to particular circumstances.
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of The Built Environment 1

State Planning Policy 7.0
Design of the Built Environment
Contents
1. Citation 3
2. Intent 3
3. Background 3
4. Application of policy 4
5. Objectives 5
6. Measures 6
7. Definitions 7
SCHEDULE 1 – DESIGN PRINCIPLES 8
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of The Built Environment 2

1. Citation
This is a State Planning Policy made under Part 3 of the Planning and Development Act 2005.
This policy may be cited as State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of the Built Environment (SPP 7.0).
2. Intent
This policy addresses design quality and built form outcomes in Western Australia. It seeks
to deliver the broad economic, environmental, social and cultural benefits that derive from
good design outcomes and supports consistent and robust design review and assessment
processes across the State.
3. Background
The Government of Western Australia promotes the importance of design quality through the
‘Better Places and Spaces: a policy for the built environment in Western Australia’ (2013).
As the built environment evolves, it is appropriate that the planning system adapts to the
increasing complexity of planning proposals by requiring a greater emphasis on design
quality. Good design outcomes improve the urban environment, benefit local communities
and leave a positive legacy for future generations.
This policy sets out the objectives, measures, principles and processes which apply
to the design and assessment of built environment proposals through the planning
system.
This policy provides the overarching framework for a range of supporting State
Planning Policies that provide design quality guidance for specific types of planning
and development proposals.
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of The Built Environment 3

4. Application of policy
This policy provides the broad framework for design of the built environment across Western
Australia. It applies to all levels of the planning hierarchy — from large-scale structure
planning, and major public works projects to development applications and subdivision
considerations. It also includes guidance for development that may impact on the public realm
but not require planning approval.
This policy is to be used to inform and guide landowners, proponents, designers, reviewers,
referral agencies and decision-makers to achieve good design outcomes in the built
environment. It encourages early and ongoing discussion of design quality matters, during
the concept, pre-lodgement and determination stages of a proposal.
This policy and complementary State Planning Policies, including their objectives, design
criteria and design guidance (where relevant) apply to the preparation, review and
assessment of:
• Activity centre plans
• Structure plans
• Local development plans
• Subdivision
• Development applications
• Public works
Supporting State Planning Policies and other policies
This policy should be read in conjunction with other aspects of the State Planning
Framework, including Perth and Peel @3.5 million sub-regional frameworks; State Planning
Policy 3.0 Urban Growth and Settlements; State Planning Policy 4.2 Activity Centres for
Perth and Peel; Liveable Neighbourhoods; Residential Design Codes; and Development
Control Policy 1.6 Planning to Support Transit Use and Transit Oriented Development.
Other relevant instruments include:
• Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
• local planning schemes
• National Construction Code
• other guides, codes and Acts that relate to that planning or development type
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of The Built Environment 4

5. Objectives
This policy includes the following objectives:
1. A consistent framework to define the desired design quality outcomes from the
planning and design of built environment projects across the State.
2. A coordinated strategy of design quality mechanisms to achieve design outcomes that
meet government and community expectations, including:
• Design Principles – performance-based approach to policy
• Design review – skilled evaluation expertise
• Design skills – skilled design expertise
3. Timely and efficient review of planning and development proposals against the Design
Principles.
The coordination of design quality mechanisms, illustrated
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of The Built Environment 5

6. Measures
Design Principles
The purpose of these Design Principles is to establish a definition of ‘good design’ that can
inform the design, review and decision-making processes for built environment proposals across
the State. The WAPC maintains the Design Principles, which are: context and character;
landscape quality; built form and scale; functionality and build quality; sustainability; amenity;
legibility; safety; community; and aesthetics. Schedule 1 includes a full description of each
Design Principle.
Supporting State Planning Policies are used to provide detailed objectives, criteria or
guidance relating to specific planning or development proposal types that are aligned with the
Design Principles.
Design review
Design review is an independent and impartial evaluation process through which a panel of
experts on the built environment assesses the design of a proposal. Design review benefits
development proposals by providing informed opinions and guidance on the interpretation and
application of design elements and principles, which can be particularly helpful for unique or
complex development proposals. Design review can often assist in achieving efficient
assessment and reduced approval times.
Design review is also beneficial for advising on design quality matters relating to strategies,
policies, master plans, precinct plans, local development plans, structure plans, activity
centre plans, and local planning schemes.
Whilst it is an advisory process, it is expected that decision-makers give due regard to the
advice and any recommendations provided.
Planning authorities, including State and local government, should establish or arrange
access to design review processes to review complex planning proposals, those proposals
identified as benefitting from design review, or as set out in the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 or recommended in the WAPC Design Review
Guide.
Design review shall be scaled according to the complexity or significance of a proposal and
shall generally follow the methodology outlined in the WAPC Design Review Guide to
achieve consistency across jurisdictions.
Design skills
Good design outcomes can be achieved when a competent and skilled architect or building
designer is engaged for the design and planning process.
Preparation of a design statement by the architect or designer may be required for certain
proposals where identified in the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015, State Planning Policies relating to that planning proposal or any relevant
local planning scheme or policy.
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of The Built Environment 6

A design statement should:
i. provide an explanation of how the proposal addresses the Design Principles
(Schedule 1)
ii. where supporting State Planning Policy relates to that planning proposal or
development type, outline how design objectives, criteria and guidelines (if relevant)
of that policy have been achieved.
7. Definitions
Unless otherwise noted, terms used in this policy have common meanings and include those
defined inthe Planning and Development Act 2005; Planning and Development (Local Planning
Schemes) Regulations 2015; and the Residential Design Codes.
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of The Built Environment 7

SCHEDULE 1 – DESIGN PRINCIPLES
1. Context and character
Good design responds to and enhances the distinctive characteristics of a local area,
contributing to a sense of place.
The distinctive characteristics of a local area include its prominent natural and built features,
social, economic and environmental conditions, the overall qualities of its built environment,
local Aboriginal culture and history and significant post-settlement heritage. Successful places
are distinctive and memorable, with a character that people can appreciate easily.
Good design responds intelligently and sensitively to these factors in order to positively
contribute to the identity of an area including adjacent sites, streetscapes and the surrounding
neighbourhood. Interpretative responses to context are encouraged; imitation of existing
features should be avoided. New development should integrate into its landscape/townscape
setting, reinforcing local distinctiveness and responding sympathetically to local building forms
and patterns of development. Building materials, construction techniques and details should,
where appropriate, enhance local distinctiveness.
Good design also responds positively to the intended future character of an area. It delivers
appropriate densities that are consistent with projected population growth, and able to be
sustained by existing or proposed transport, green and social infrastructure.
Consideration of local context is particularly important for sites in established areas that are
undergoing change or identified for change. Context is also important for greenfield
development, to ensure a site-specific response to existing landscape and topographical
features.
2. Landscape quality
Good design recognises that together landscape and buildings operate as an integrated and
sustainable system, within a broader ecological context.
Outdoor spaces are important. Public spaces can include parks and nature reserves, as well as
more formal squares, paved areas and streets. Designed with people in mind, they should be
attractive and comfortable, offering opportunities for people to meet and socialise, bringing
vitality and identity to a place.
Good landscape design protects existing environmental features and ecosystems, promotes
biodiversity, offer a variety of habitats for flora and fauna, enhances the local environmental
context and restores lost or damaged ecosystems, where possible. It considers environmental
factors such as water and soil management, ground and site conditions, solar access,
microclimate, tree canopy, urban heat island impacts, habitat creation and preservation of green
infrastructure – balancing these against social, cultural and economic conditions.
Good landscape design employs hard and soft landscape and urban design elements to create
external environments that interact in a considered manner with built form, resulting in well-
integrated, engaging places that contribute to local identity and streetscape character.
Good landscape design provides optimal levels of external amenity, functionality and
weather protection while encouraging social inclusion, equitable access and respect for
the public and neighbours. Well-designed landscape environments ensure effective
establishment and facilitate ease of long term management and maintenance.
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of The Built Environment 8

3. Built form and scale
Good design ensures that the massing and height of development is appropriate to its setting
and successfully negotiates between existing built form and the intended future character of
the local area.
Buildings can define open spaces by enclosing them. Good design delivers buildings and
places of a scale that responds to landform characteristics and existing built fabric in a
considered manner, mitigating the potential for negative amenity impacts on both private land
and the public realm.
The scale, massing and height of new development should respond positively to that of the
adjoining buildings, the topography, the general pattern of heights, and the views, vistas and
landmarks of the place, reinforcing a coherent local identity. The orientation, proportion,
composition, and articulation of built form elements should deliver an outcome that is suited to
the purpose, defines the public domain, contributes to the character of adjacent streetscapes
and parks, and provides good amenity for people at ground level.
4. Functionality and build quality
Good design meets the needs of users efficiently and effectively, balancing functional
requirements to perform well and deliver optimum benefit over the full life-cycle.
Well-designed functional environments provide spaces that are suited to their intended
purpose and arranged to facilitate good relationships to other spaces, and ease of use. Good
design provides flexible and adaptable spaces to maximise their utilisation and accommodate
appropriate future requirements without the need for major modifications.
Good build quality is achieved by using durable materials, finishes, elements and systems that
are easy to maintain and weather well over time. The outcome should be a development that is
well-detailed, resilient to the wear and tear expected from its intended use, is easy to upgrade
and without excessive maintenance requirements. Consideration should be given to the full
life-cycle of the proposal and mitigation of potential climate change impacts.
Good design accommodates services in an integrated manner, without detriment to the
appearance, functionality and serviceability of the final outcome.
5. Sustainability
Good design optimises the sustainability of the built environment, delivering positive
environmental, social and economic outcomes.
Sustainable landscape and urban design adheres to established water-sensitive urban design
principles, minimises negative impacts on existing natural features and ecological processes
and facilitates green infrastructure at all project scales.
Sustainable built environments use passive environmental design measures at various
scales, responding to local climate and site conditions by providing optimal orientation,
shading, thermal performance and natural ventilation. Reducing reliance on technology for
heating and cooling minimises energy use, resource consumption and operating costs over
the life-cycle of the project.
Sustainable design also includes the use of sustainable construction materials, recycling, good
waste management practices, re-use of materials and existing structures, harnessing of
renewable energy sources, and total water cycle management.
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of The Built Environment 9

6. Amenity
Good design provides successful places that offer a variety of uses and activities while
optimising internal and external amenity for occupants, visitors and neighbours, providing
environments that are comfortable, productive and healthy.
Places should incorporate a mix of uses that work together to create viable environments
that respond to the diversity of the local community and its culture. New development
should offer a range of uses and activities that contribute to the vitality of the place at
different times of the day and week and provide choices of housing, shopping, employment
and entertainment.
Well-designed external spaces provide welcoming, comfortable environments that are
universally accessible, with effective shade as well as protection from unwanted wind, rain,
traffic and noise. Good design mitigates negative impacts on surrounding buildings and
places, including overshadowing, overlooking, glare, reflection and noise.
Good design provides internal rooms and spaces that are adequately sized, comfortable and
easy to use and furnish, with good levels of daylight, natural ventilation and outlook. Delivering
good levels of internal amenity also includes the provision of appropriate levels of acoustic
protection and visual privacy, adequate storage space, and ease of access for all.
7. Legibility
Good design results in buildings and places that are legible, with clear connections and
easily identifiable elements to help people find their way around.
Good urban design makes places easy to navigate, with recognisable routes, intersections
and landmarks while being well-connected to existing movement networks. Sightlines are
well-considered, with built form responding to important vantage points. Movement through
a place should always be easy for everyone who uses it, whether they are on foot or by
bicycle, public transport or private vehicle. Efforts should always be made to giving
pedestrian movement priority over vehicular movement
Good design provides environments that are logical and intuitive to use, at the scales of
building, site and precinct. Consideration should be given to how the urban design of street
environments can provide visual cues as to the street hierarchy.
Access and circulation within developments should contribute to a fine-grain network of
direct and connected routes within and beyond the site and avoid creating large non-
permeable blocks.
Within buildings, legibility is served by a clear hierarchy of spaces with identifiable entries
and clear wayfinding. Externally, buildings and spaces should allow their purpose to be
easily understood, and provide clear distinction between public and private spaces.
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of The Built Environment 10

8. Safety
Good design optimises safety and security, minimising the risk of personal harm and
supporting safe behaviour and use.
Safety and security is promoted by maximising opportunities for passive surveillance of public
and communal areas and providing clearly defined, well-lit, secure access points that are
easily maintained and appropriate to the purpose of the development.
Good design provides a positive, clearly defined relationship between public and private
spaces and addresses the need to provide optimal safety and security both within a
development and to the adjacent public realm.
The design of vehicular transport routes should integrate safety requirements in a manner that
mitigates negative impacts on pedestrian amenity.
9. Community
Good design responds to local community needs as well as the wider social context, providing
environments that support a diverse range of people and facilitate social interaction.
Good design encourages social engagement and physical activity in an inclusive, equitable
manner and considers how the activities inside buildings can bring life and activity to public
spaces. Places should be able to accommodate change over time, create continuity with the
past and respond to new social, market or environmental demands.
New development should have some capacity to adapt to changing demographics, an ageing
population, new uses and people with disability. In residential proposals, good design achieves
a mix of dwelling types, providing housing choice for different demographics, living needs and
household budgets, and accommodating all ages and abilities.
10. Aesthetics
Good design is the product of a skilled, judicious design process that results in attractive and
inviting buildings and places that engage the senses.
Good design resolves the many competing challenges of a project into an elegant and
coherent outcome. At the precinct scale, good design delivers outcomes that are logical and
guided by a consideration of the experiential qualities that it will provide. Consideration
should be given to how the arrangement of built form and spaces can contribute to the
setting of important buildings and landmarks, including public art. A well-conceived design
addresses all scales, from the articulation of building form through to the selection and
detailing of materials and building elements, enabling sophisticated, integrated responses to
the character of the place.
In assessing design quality, consideration of aesthetics should not be limited to style and
appearance; the coherence of the design concept and the cultural relevance of the proposal
should also be taken into account.
State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of The Built Environment 11