Local Planning
Policy 2.14
Advertisements and Signs
fremantle.wa.gov.au

Advertisements and Signs
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. This policy may be cited as Local Planning
Policy 2.14 – Advertisements and Signs (LPP 2.14).
Introduction
The purpose of this policy is to provide requirements for advertisements where they
require planning approval under the Planning and Development (Local Planning Scheme)
Regulations 2015 (the Regulations) and the Local Planning Scheme No. 4 (the Scheme).
Objectives
The objectives of this Policy are to ensure that advertisements:
1. Are minimised and designed to not detract from the character and amenity of the
area;
2. Are not detrimental to the amenity of nearby residential properties;
3. Avoid a proliferation of signs and prevent streetscapes from becoming visually
cluttered;
4. Do not cause hazardous distraction or danger to motorists, pedestrians and other
road and footpath users;
5. Are integrated into and proportional to the scale and features of the building to
which they relate;
6. Do not dominate the view of the building from the street nor detrimentally affect
view corridors or the streetscape; and
7. Are in keeping with, and do not detract from, the heritage significance of a
heritage-protected place.
Application of this Policy
The provisions of this policy apply to all land zoned and reserved under the Scheme.
For advertisements proposed on land not zoned or reserved under the Scheme, the
provisions of this Policy will be used for guidance purposes when undertaking a planning
assessment.
Variations to this Policy will be assessed against the objectives of this Policy.
Advertisements exempt from requiring planning approval can be found in Local Planning
Policy 1.7: Development Exempt from Planning Approval.
1/6

Policy Provisions
PART 1 - GENERAL ADVERTISEMENT PROVISIONS
1.1 General requirements applicable to all signage:
a) Advertisements are not to be placed on properties primarily used for residential
purposes where the advertisement does not pertain to a relevant home
business, occupation or store on the site unless otherwise provided for in
another local planning policy.
b) Advertisements should be located and designed so as not to cause a hazardous
distraction to motorists, pedestrians or other road users.
c) Advertisements should be compatible with the style, scale and character of the
surrounding streetscape, and the predominant uses within the locality.
Consideration will be given to the number and type of existing signs in the
locality so as to avoid visual clutter.
d) Advertisements should not impede pedestrian or vehicle movements.
e) Illuminated signs should be maintained to operate as an illuminated sign.
f) Advertisements should not emit a flashing or moving light or radio; animation
or movement in its design or structure; or reflective, retro-reflective or
fluorescent materials in its design structure.
g) Animated signs are discouraged in all zones due to amenity impacts, driver
distraction and visual clutter. Large animated signs are generally not
compatible with heritage-protected places.
h) Advertisements are not to include:
i. the name, logo, or symbol of a company or other organisation that does
not own or substantially occupy the site or building on which the
advertisement is located;
ii. a product or service not provided on the site on which the
advertisement is located;
iii. a product or service that does not form part of the signage displaying
the name, logo or symbol of a company or other organisation that owns
or substantially occupies the site or building on which the advertisement
is located; or
iv. signs for an activity or event not occurring on the site on which the
advertisement is located.
2/6

PART 2 - PROVISIONS FOR SPECIFIC TYPES OF ADVERTISEMENTS
2.2 Awning Fascia or Verandah Fascia Signs
2.2.1 Awning fascia or verandah fascia signs should be:
(a) Contained within the depth of the existing fascia and do not exceed the length of
the tenancy; and
(b) Restricted to three signs per street frontage per tenancy.
2.3 Below Awning or Verandah Signs
2.3.1 Below awning or verandah signs should:
(a) Allow for a headway of at least 2.75m above the footpath as measured from
immediately below the sign;
(b) Be located so that they are perpendicular to the building façade;
(c) Not exceed the width of the awning or verandah; and
(d) Be restricted to one sign per street frontage per tenancy and can be double
sided.
2.4 Wall, Fascia, Building Identification or Projecting Sign
2.4.1 Wall, fascia or projecting signs should:
(a) Where the sign is a projecting sign, allow for a headway of at least 2.75m above
the footpath as measured from immediately below the sign;
(b) Not project above the fascia of the building;
(c) Not exceed the frontage of the tenancy; and
(d) Be restricted to three signs per street frontage per tenancy.
2.5 Free Standing Sign or Pole or Pylon Sign
2.5.1 Free standing signs, pole or pylon signs should:
(a) Not exceed the height of the immediately adjoining subject building or be no
more than 6.0m in height, whichever is the lesser;
(b) Not significantly obstruct the view between the building and the street, thereby
preventing casual surveillance of the street from the property and vice versa;
(c) Demonstrate that the advertisement is consistent with a particular design
convention associated with a specific land use (i.e. pylon signs for petrol
stations); and
(d) Be restricted to one sign per site, but may include the advertising of multiple
tenancies and may be illuminated and / or double sided.
2.6 Window Sign
3/6

2.6.1 Window signs should:
(a) Ensure casual surveillance of the street is sufficiently maintained; and
(b) Cover no more than 50% of the total window area of the tenancy.
(c) Where Animated signs are considered, they are limited to 1 per tenancy
2.7 Roof Signs
2.7.1 Roof signs should:
(a) Not project more than 1.5m above the height of the roofline;
(b) Not exceed the length of the tenancy;
(c) Be restricted to one sign per street frontage per tenancy and may be
illuminated and / or double sided; and
(c) Not overshadow major openings or outdoor living spaces of neighbouring
residential properties.
2.8 Other Signs
2.8.1 In assessing advertisements that do not fit within the definitions, advertisements
shall be assessed against Part 1, Part 3 (where applicable), and the objectives of
this Policy.
PART 3 - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTIES ON THE HERITAGE LIST
3.1 Advertisements on a heritage-protected place should:
(a) Not have a detrimental impact on the heritage significance of the place;
(b) Not cover any significant architectural features or detailing of a building;
(c) Not significantly obstruct the view between the building and the street; and
(d) Fit to the traditional location/positioning of the specific building or streetscape
whenever possible.
4/6

Definitions
For the purposes of this policy the following definitions of the Regulations and the Scheme
apply to this policy: ‘Advertisement’, ‘Sign’, ‘Window Sign’ and ‘Temporary Sign’. In
addition to these Scheme definitions, the following definitions apply:
Awning or verandah fascia sign means an
advertisement attached to the fascia of an awning
or verandah.
Below awning or verandah sign means an
advertisement attached to or supported below an
awning, verandah.
Building identification sign and wall or fascia
sign means an advertisement attached to or
painted on a wall or fascia of a building (including
structures attached to the building) or on a
structure that protrudes no more than 50mm from
the wall, fascia or structure.
Pole, pylon or freestanding sign means
advertisement which is erected on a permanently
attached freestanding pole, pylon or other structure
and used to advertise one or multiple tenancies on
private land.
Projecting sign means an advertisement attached
to and protruding perpendicularly or horizontally,
from a building or structure but is not attached to
the roof of the building or structure.
5/6

Roof sign means an advertisement that is
displayed on, or erected on or above, the parapet or
eaves or roof surface of a building.
Illuminated sign means an advertisement illuminated by internal and/or external
lights or composed of light devices that do not flash, change intensity or pattern.
Advertisement that is considered illuminated will generally be considered under
another definition of a sign and includes advertisements that are projected onto a
building or vertical surface.
Animated Sign includes but not limited to any sign or its contents that moves,
and includes flashing or “chasing” lights, as well as video signs, plasma and LCD
screen signs and signs which are “trivision”, “variable message”, “changing
message” and “fibre optic” signs.
Other sign means a sign that is not consistent with any of the other signage
types defined for the purposes of this policy.
Exempt Advertisement means advertising that does not require the prior
planning approval of Council.
Heritage-protected place is as defined in Schedule 2 Regulation 1A of the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. For ease of reference, the
definition includes state registered places, locally registered places, places the subject of a
heritage order or heritage agreement, and all properties within a heritage area, including
non-contributory properties.
Local Planning Policy – Document Control
Responsible Officer Previous Policy Title Next Review Date
Manager City Planning 2.14: Advertisements (four years)
Version Decision to Adopt/Amend Brief Details of Modifications
1 27 July 2016 OCM Adoption
2 4 October 2019 OCM Moving requirements from scheme to policy
4 11 March 2026 OCM – C2603-8
Public Consultation Yes/No
WAPC Approval Required? No Date approved by WAPC N/A
6/6