POLICY DC 4.1
INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISION
BACKGROUND NOTES
1. This Policy Statement replaces Policy Statement No.
P.9 of the former Town Planning Board with the same
title, which was first published in February, 1983, and
slightly modified in June 1983. The provisions of the
former policy were the subject of formal consultations
with both local government and other interested bodies
prior to its release. The 1983 modification reduced the
minimum width for roads in industrial areas from 25m
to 20m, although heavily trafficked routes were to
remain at 25m.
2. The former policy has now been operational for some
five years, and no problems or difficulties have become
evident. Accordingly, this Policy Statement simply
repeats those provisions, redrafted into the
Commission's own policy format. The only significant
change is in the section dealing with Public Open
Space, where some additional factors which may
influence the Commission to require the giving up of
land for open space as a condition of subdivision have
been included.
Adopted July 1988

POLICY NO. DC 4.1
INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISION
CONTENTS:
1. Introduction
2. Policy Objectives
3. Policy Measures
3.1 Zoning
3.2 Relationship to Adjacent Development
3.3 Lot Sizes and Shapes
3.4 Flexibility and Staging
3.5 Access and Road Layout
3.6 Public Open Space
3.7 Services

1. INTRODUCTION berming, and other site planning
techniques.
1.1 This policy statement provides guidance on the matters
considered by the Commission when determining 3.3 LOT SIZES AND SHAPES
applications for industrial subdivision throughout the
State. These include such matters as the design and 3.3. 1 Each proposed lot should offer maximum
shape of industrial lots, road layout, servicing and open utility in terms of budding space and
space requirements. accessibility bearing in mind the requirements
of modem industrial activities.
1.2 More detailed development control requirements - such
as car parking, landscaping and the design and siting of 3.3.2 In certain circumstances, the Commission
industrial buildings - will be found in the Town Planning may request information on preliminary
Scheme and policies of the relevant local authority. It development designs before making a
should also be noted that a major review of industrial decision on an industrial subdivision. This
land use in the Perth Metropolitan Region has recently request is likely to be made for proposals
been undertaken through the Corridor Plan Review which involve irregular shaped lots or where
and the PRIZE (Perth Region Industrial Zone there may be access problems.
Evaluation) survey. The Commission intends to develop
a metropolitan industrial land policy based on the 3.3.3 The Commission recognises that lot sizes for
findings of this review which may then necessitate the different types of industrial subdivision will
some amendment or addition to this policy statement. vary according to function and purpose. No
minimum lot sizes are specified within this
2. POLICY OBJECTIVES policy, as the land area required for a
particular industrial activity or activities should
• To encourage the development of well designed reflect the most efficient and beneficial
industrial areas serving the full range of general and utilisation of the land involved. In considering
special industrial needs throughout the State. appropriate lot sizes for an industrial
subdivision, the Commission will have regard
• To provide for the safe and efficient movement of to the following factors:
traffic to and from each site within the industrial
area. a) the subdivision, where it involves the
creation of a significant number of lots,
• To provide for infrastructure services and public should provide for variety in lot size;
open space consistent with the operational needs
of industrial users and the workforce. b) the size of lots should provide sufficient
space to accommodate the industrial
• To protect the amenity of adjacent land uses, where operations and buildings envisaged,
necessary, from the effects of industrial make allowance for possible future
development. expansion, and allow the site to function
properly and efficiently in terms of
3. POLICY MEASURES development requirements of the local
authority(s) concerned These
3.1 ZONING requirements may relate to such factors
as safe ingress and egress, vehicular
3.1.1 The land proposed to be subdivided must be movement within the curtilage of the
appropriately zoned m the local authority's site, parking, deliveries, storage and bin
Town Planning Scheme and, where areas, boundary setback requirements
applicable, the Metropolitan Region Scheme. and landscaped areas;
3.1.2 When considering applications for subdivision c) the overall pattern of lot sizes in the
of land for industrial purposes, the locality and the type of industrial activity
Commission will have regard to relevant characteristic of the locality in which the
provisions m the local authority's Town subdivision is located;
Planning Scheme.
d) planning policies and other
3.2 RELATIONSHIP TO ADJACENT requirements of the Commission, the
DEVELOPMENT local authority and other consultees
(primarily relevant servicing authorities)
3.2.1 It is important that the design of an industrial which relate to specific areas, localities
area ensures compatibility with adjacent or activities.
commercial and/or residential areas. This
may be achieved in the following ways: 3.4 FLEXIBILITY AND STAGING
a) an arterial street or freeway may be used 3.4.1 Because lot size requirements are difficult to
as a buffer area. Here both industrial predict at the planning stage, the initial design
and residential lots may face internal should allow for as much flexibility as
roads with appropriate landscaping and possible.
screening along the arterial road
frontages. 3.4.2 Flexibility depends to a large extent on the
particular circumstances and the objectives oF
b) alternatively, compatibility may be the subdivider and may be achieved in several
achieved by sensitive landscaping, ways. The following are four examples:

a) subdivision of an area into a series of 3.6 PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
modules or basic site-units, with firms
selecting the number and combination 3.6. 1 The Commission has no general requirement
of units that suit their needs; for the provision of public open space in
industrial areas. However, it is necessary to
b) the design of services so that larger lots ensure that adequate facilities are available for
can later, if required, be subdivided into both passive and active recreation during
smaller units with a minimum of cost workers leisure periods, and it may require
and disruption; land to be given up free of cost for this
purpose in particular circumstances. In this
c) preparation of a structure plan showing regard, the size of workforce in the area, the
only major roads and activity areas with proximity of existing public open space and
inclusion of policy statements for lot the scale of new development being proposed
sizes and location of different industrial will be taken into consideration.
types;
3.6.2 In addition, land in an industrial subdivision
d) in the case of larger subdivisions, by may also be required to be given up as public
adopting a staged development strategy open space m order to provide for buffer
and progressively adjusting lot sizes to strips and/or suitable planted areas between
take account of the market experience industrial uses and any adjacent non industrial
in the earlier stages. areas. Again, the decision will be dependent
upon the particular circumstances of the
3.5 ACCESS AND ROAD LAYOUT application.
3.5.1 Good access to and from the subdivision is 3.7 SERVICES
imperative and the optimal number of access
points should be provided. 3.7.1 Industrial development requires water for
domestic and health uses, manufacturing
3.5.2 Generally a simple layout providing a clear processes and fire protection. Accordingly,
hierarchy of roads is desirable. Roads which each industrial lot will be required to connect
may attract unrelated fast-moving traffic from to a reticulated water supply by arrangement
nearby congested routes should be avoided. with the relevant water authority.
3.5.3 Access from individual lots to major roads 3.7.2 Connection to a reticulated sewerage system
should be minimised. The use of minor roads is a normal requirement of industrial
for such access is desirable whenever subdivision. However, where a reticulated
practical. sewerage connection is not available and is
not in early prospect, this requirement may be
3.5.4 To facilitate the movement of large and dispensed with when the Commission:
cumbersome vehicles, culs-de-sac and
battleaxe lots should generally be avoided, a) is satisfied that development will be limit
curves should not be abrupt, and corners will ed to 'dry' industry, and
normally be provided with a minimum
truncation of 14m for primary and district b) is advised by the relevant authorities that
distributors, and 8.5m for all other roads. sod conditions allow for efficient on-site
disposal of effluent on a long-term
3.5.5 Battleaxe lots may be acceptable for light and basis.
service industries which are not serviced by
larger vehicles. Details such as the shape of 3.7.3 If the area to be subdivided is, or may be,
the effective lot area, the need for truncations serviced by a railway, the subdivisional pattern
within the lot and the width of the access leg should take this service into consideration and
will be determined on the basis of each utilise it to the best advantage for the sites
proposal in consultation with the local involved. Where it is intended to provide rag
authority and other relevant authorities. In all connection by way of sidings into the
cases, however, the construction of the access industrial properties, the preferred
to the lot to the specification of the local subdivisonal layout is that of a "herringbone"
authority will be required as a condition of pattern. The desired minimum length of
subdivision. The use of shared access legs is sidings on industrial sites is in the order of
not acceptable in industrial situations. 200 metres. Detailed enquiries in this regard
should be directed to Westrail.
3.5.6 In industrial areas, a minimum road reserve
width of 20 metres is no~ required to provide 3.7.4 Requirements relating to such matters as
for safe and efficient traffic movement. For drainage, electricity, telephones, and the
heavily trafficked/major through routes, a disposal of trade wastes should be arranged
minimum road reserve width of 25 metres is with the relevant servicing authorities.
required. Carriageway widths of 10 metres
are favoured. 3.7.5 Lot boundaries should be drawn to take into
consideration any easements required for
services (e.g. electricity, sewerage and
drainage) with a view to maximising the use of
the surface of those areas for such purposes
as car parking, storage or landscaping.