Local Planning
Policy 3.3
Local Planning Areas (East)
White Gum Valley, Samson & Beaconsfield
fremantle.wa.gov.au
Page 0 of 8

Local Planning Areas (East)
Statutory background
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (the Regulations). This policy may be cited as
Local Planning Policy 3.3 – Local Planning Areas (East) (LPP 3.3).
Introduction
The purpose of this policy is to encourage development that reinforces and enhances the
character of the local areas, support the resilience of the local areas in responding to
changing climatic and economic conditions, preserve established development interfaces,
and promote activation of the public realm.
Objective
The objective of this policy is to:
• Encourage the development of vibrant, safe streetscapes that respect the existing
unique character of each Local Planning Area while supporting their resilience to
social, environment and economic challenges.
Application of this Policy
This policy applies to Local Planning Areas contained within the former Kim Beazley school
site within White Gum Valley, the Local Centre zone in Samson, and the Lefroy Road
Neighbourhood Centre of Beaconsfield. It does not supersede any relevant Local Planning
Scheme No.4 (LPS4) provisions or applicable local planning policies, inclusive of heritage
requirements.
Developments and other planning proposals seeking to vary the policy criteria are to
demonstrate compliance with the objective of this policy, LPS4, and the relevant design
principles of the Residential Design Codes (R-Codes). This policy is to be read in
conjunction with Schedule 7 – Local Planning Areas (Development Requirements) of LPS4.
Where this policy is inconsistent with the Scheme or an adopted structure plan or local
development plan, that instrument shall prevail to the extent of any inconsistency. Where
this policy is inconsistent with a more general local planning policy, this policy shall prevail
to the extent of any inconsistency.

Figure 1: Policy extent within White Gum Valley, Samson, and Beaconsfield

Policy Provisions
1.0 White Gum Valley
Figure 2 – Former Kim Beazley School Site
This sub-policy addresses the remaining undeveloped portions of land, namely:
• Lots 2 and 11 - R60 density coding
Those deemed-to-comply provisions of the Residential Design Codes (“R-Codes”) Volume
1 Part C that are varied or replaced by this policy are as follows:
- 1.3 – Communal open space
- 3.2 – Building height
- 3.3 – Street boundary setbacks
Development proposals within Lot 11 are further subject to the requirements of Local
Development Plan – Lot 11 Mouquet Vista - White Gum Valley, adopted by the City on 4
June 2019.

The provisions of this policy apply to residential development assessed under Part C of the
Residential Design Codes (“R-Codes”).
1.1 Street Setbacks
Lots 2 and 11 (R60)
1.1.1 Dwellings shall be setback from the primary street and secondary street(s)
in accordance with Figure 3.
1.2 Communal Open Space – Lot 2
1.2.1 A minimum of 20% of Lot 2 shall be set aside for communal open space
purposes for the exclusive use of residents.
1.2.2 Variations to the requirements of clause 1.2.1 above may be considered
subject to the proposed development meeting the following criterion to the
satisfaction of the City:
i. The requirement for communal open space may be reduced by up to
5% if recreational facilities (i.e. fixed BBQ, seating and shade
structures) and soft landscaping demonstrating tree retention,
increased tree canopy, and Water Sensitive Urban Design principles
inclusive of endemic plantings and permeable surfacing, are provided
within the designated communal open space.
1.3 Building Priority Zones
1.3.1 Developments shall provide a contiguous and activated built form frontage
to the boundaries identified as “Building Priority Zones” on Figure 3.
1.3.2 Design responses may include but are not limited to, the orientation of
dwellings to the street, habitable rooms adjacent and overlooking the public
realm and location of primary vehicle and pedestrian entrances for the
streets.
1.3.3 No open car parking (carports or open at-grade car parking) is permitted
within this zone.

Figure 3: Lots 2 & 11

2.0 Samson
2.1 Local Centre building requirements
Note: Where development includes a residential component assessed under the R-Codes
and the below criteria conflicts with the R-Codes, the R-Codes prevail to the extent of any
inconsistency unless the criteria is within LPS4.
Item Provision
a) Wall height Maximum 6m as per Schedule 7 of LPS4.
b) Setbacks Nil setbacks, except where the site abuts a residential lot in which instance the
setbacks are to align with the Residential Design Codes of the affected lot.
c) Site 50%
coverage May be increased where a development incorporates a land use or element
that serves the public including but not limited to a hospitality or community
purpose use.
d) Landscaping 10% of total lot area.
May be reduced to 7% where a Regulated Tree is retained (refer to the City’s
Tree Retention Local Planning Policy).
e) Trees 1 per 4 car bays provided.
f) Crossovers Maximum 1 per street frontage, designed to avoid conflict with street trees.
g) Car parking In accordance with Table 2 of LPS4.
2.1.1 Landscaping should demonstrate waterwise planting principles and tree
species appropriate to the environment.
2.2 Matters to be considered
In addition to the Deemed provisions within the Regulations, the City shall have regard to:
• The design of vehicle ingress / egress to enable the provision of parking, delivery bays,
access and manoeuvrability and to minimise traffic impacts including intrusion of
commercial vehicles into adjoining residential streets;
• High standard of landscaping demonstrating water sensitive urban design principles
inclusive of permeable surfacing and porous ground covers, species endemic to the
Fremantle locality, retention and provision of shade trees sited to avoid conflict with
development and trafficable surfaces, and controlled lighting that minimises light spill
onto adjoining parkland or other natural reserves and residential areas;
• Materials and finishes to enhance the visual amenity of the area, which can include
clay or limestone brick, galvanised steel, and timber. Concrete facades and rendered
brick should not be used unless it features articulation, inclusive of windows and
patterned scoring, and varying colour to prevent large expanses of blank frontages.

3.0 Beaconsfield
3.1 Neighbourhood Centre (cnr Lefroy Road & York Street Centre) building requirements
This policy does not apply to the South Street Beaconsfield Neighbourhood Centre which is
addressed separately under Schedule 7 of LPS4 (Sub-Area 5.3.1)
Note: Where development includes a residential component assessed under the R-Codes
and the below criteria conflicts with the R-Codes, the R-Codes prevail to the extent of any
inconsistency unless the criteria is within LPS4.
Item Provision
a) Wall height Maximum 5.5m as per Schedule 7 of LPS4.
b) Setbacks Nil setbacks, except where the site abuts a residential lot in which
instance the setbacks are to align with the R-Codes of the affected lot.
c) Site coverage 75%
d) Landscaping 10% of total lot area.
May be reduced to 7% where a Regulated Tree is retained (refer to the
City’s Tree Retention Local Planning Policy).
e) Shade Trees 1 per 4 car bays provided.
f) Crossovers Maximum 1 per street frontage, designed to avoid conflict with street
trees.
Note: Crossovers to South Street will require Main Roads approval.
g) Car parking In accordance with Table 2 of LPS4.
3.1.1 Variations to d) and e) may be considered where redevelopment of the
existing building is not substantial.
3.1.2 Landscaping should demonstrate waterwise planting principles and tree
species appropriate to the environment.
3.2 Matters to be considered
In addition to the Deemed provisions within the Regulations, the City shall have regard to:
• The design of vehicle ingress / egress to enable the provision of parking, delivery bays,
access and manoeuvrability and to minimise traffic impacts including intrusion of
commercial vehicles into adjoining residential streets;
• High standard of landscaping demonstrating water sensitive urban design principles
inclusive of permeable surfacing and porous ground covers, species endemic to the
Fremantle locality, retention and provision of shade trees sited to avoid conflict with
development and trafficable surfaces, and controlled lighting that minimises light spill
onto adjoining parkland or other natural reserves and residential areas;
• Materials and finishes to enhance the visual amenity of the area, which can include
clay or limestone brick, galvanised steel, and timber. Concrete facades and rendered
brick should not be used unless it features articulation, inclusive of windows and
patterned scoring, and varying colour to prevent large expanses of blank frontages.

Responsibility and review information
Responsible officer: Manager City Planning
Document adoption/approval details 13/05/2026 – C2605-9
Document amendment details Policies combined, consolidated and rationalised to
align with the Residential Design Codes. The
policy is derived from former Local Planning Policy
3.15 – Former Kim Beazley Primary School -
White Gum Valley, Local Planning Policy 3.5
Beaconsfield, and Local Planning Policy 3.9 -
Samson
Next review date 13/05/2030
(maximum of four years from last review)