Operational
Policy 1.1
Subdivision of land – general principles
February 2020
The Department of Planning, Lands and Disclaimer © State of Western Australian website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
H o W p u th w s r e e e e r t n s i i o p r t e e d a a f n r o g y a s t o y e , o a , t t n u a s h a t c d r n e e k r d i c p r e n u s s t d o . h s p e w t o e o s l s c c e d e t e d i n a t w g o n d e h s E a s o n l o d t t w f h e s t e r i h w l s l t i r s h f p o a o a l d a l s l o a n i t t r w d i a e o . n n i w n d a i l t h T L C e o n a h x n o o n p i t m s t d r h l e i d m s a e s o b a s i b c s e n le s u a d d i s m o f i o o H n s e r r e . t n a i h A r m t n i a n t h y a t p y a g t l d i r h s e e e a e b d p m o e G r n i a e n e o g s b n t v e e e h e p n h i o r r s t n a o r a p l m d t l f o u i u o o e s b c n f s n l e t , i t w c h d s , a t i e h t b a t s a i W t y o t e e s n e t m m o h s i e t e e s p e v n m l D r o e t n e , r y a o p e A d w p e a e u h s i r s n i i t n t c a m i r h o n a g e n d l m o i n a o o a t a n g r d y o P a e f f o l d n a a P c v t i n l t c s a i h n c u n a e i r a r n n e a n g i n s d g , P W G 1 Pe 4 u o e r 0 b r s t d l h t W i e o s W h r i n l n l e A i S a d A t m 6 e u b 0 p s y S 0 t h t r 0 t a r e h e l n e i e a s t n o n P l H a o n u n s in e g Commission e t f N a e m a x l: t : a i 0 0 o i 8 l 8 n : i 6 a 6 n 5 l 5 f R 5 o 5 1 e @ 1 l 8 a d 9 y 0 p 0 0 S 0 lh 2 e 1 . r w v a ic .g e o : 1 v 3 .a 3 u 6 77
a result of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect Locked Bag 2506 This document is available in
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred to Perth WA 6001 alternative formats on application to
herein. Professional advice should be obtained before applying the the Communications Branch.
information contained in this document to particular circumstances. Published February 2020

Operational Policy
Operational
Policy 1.1
Subdivision of Land – general principles
Contents
Background notes 1 3.7 Lawful development 5
1. Introduction 3.8 Leasehold strata 5
2. Policy objectives 1 3.9 Utility services provision 6
3. Policy measures 2 3.10 Vehicular access 6
3.1 Consistency with 3.11 Capability for development 7
long-term planning goals 2
3.12 Other policy requirements 7
3.2 Context and site analysis 2
4. Implementation of policy 7
3.3 Site responsive design 3
4.1 Procedures 7
3.4 Structure plans 3
4.2 Reviews 7
3.5 Super lot subdivisions 4
4.3 Compliance with subdivision approvals 7
3.6 Development contributions 5

Operational Policy 1.1
1
Subdivision of land – general principles
Background notes 1. Introduction 2. Policy objectives
1. This policy sets out the general principles 1.1 This policy is largely concerned with matters • To control the subdivision of land, number, size
that will be used by the Western Australian stated in Part 10 of the Planning and and arrangement of lots within the framework of
Planning Commission (WAPC) in determining Development Act 2005, the Planning and the relevant legislation, regulations and policy.
applications for the subdivision of land. It Development Regulations 2009, the Strata
• To ensure that the subdivision of land is
also indicates the basic requirements for Titles Act 1985 (as amended), and the Strata
consistent with:
the creation of new lots and the procedures Titles (General) Regulations 2019, which
the WAPC will follow to process subdivision deal with the subdivision of land alienated - State Planning Policy No. 1
applications. from the Crown. The policy sets out the – State Planning Framework (SPP No. 1)
2. The context for this policy is provided by State general principles that will guide the WAPC in - Perth and Peel@3.5million
determining applications for subdivision.
Planning Policy 1 State Planning Framework - relevant WAPC policies and plans
(SPP 1), the State Planning Strategy and For the intent of this policy, subdivision
the principles for sustainable land use and includes the creation of a new lot or lots, the - the provisions of the relevant local
development contained in Directions 2031 and amalgamation of existing lots, and any other planning scheme.
Beyond, Perth and Peel@3.5 million and the dealings in land which require the approval • Orderly and proper planning and the character
sub-regional planning frameworks that guide of the WAPC. This includes the creation of of the area.
the structure planning and subdivision for freehold, survey-strata, strata and leasehold
• To ensure a comprehensive and co-ordinated
greenfield and large brownfield (urban infill) lots.
approach to the subdivision of WAPC-endorsed
sites.
1.2 In its determination of applications, the WAPC urban expansion areas in metropolitan Perth,
3. The policy is complemented by other policies will seek to ensure that the broad objectives regional centres and country towns.
that are concerned with the more detailed in section 2 of this policy are met. Applications
• To ensure the subdivision pattern is responsive
aspects of lot creation for particular land that do not comply with the objectives will
to the characteristics of the site, including
uses. The general principles should be read either not be approved or the WAPC may
environmental features, sustainability principles
in conjunction with the relevant use-specific impose conditions to an approval to secure
and the local planning context.
policy to give a comprehensive coverage of these objectives.
the WAPC’s policy requirements for any • To create a site-responsive design through a
land use. street and lot layout that provides local amenity
and safe and efficient modes of transport
including cycling and walking.
• To promote a sense of place and conservation
of places of historic cultural heritage
significance.
Western Australian Planning Commission – February 2020

Operational Policy 1.1
2
Subdivision of land – general principles
• To ensure that any subdivision of land with 3. Policy measures considering an application for subdivision
heritage listed buildings and grounds does approval. The relevant matters include but
not prejudice the heritage significance of the are not limited to:
property. 3.1 Consistency with long-term
(a) the size, shape and dimensions
• To facilitate development that achieves planning goals of each lot
appropriate community standards of health,
(b) the services available to each lot
safety and amenity. SPP 1 sets out the general principles for planning
and brings together the WAPC’s State planning (c) drainage of the land
• To support the maintenance and enhancement
policies, regional and sub–regional strategies,
of the urban tree canopy. (d) access to each lot
operational policies, position statements and
• To ensure constructed vehicle access from the guidelines into a single policy framework. SPP 1 (e) the amount of public open space
gazetted public road system to each new lot. together with any applicable region scheme and to be provided
the relevant local planning scheme, including
• To create lots that are capable of lawful (f) any relevant planning scheme
any local planning strategy (pursuant to the
development and, at the same time, ensure that
(h) any relevant regulations
Model Provisions as set out in the Planning and
existing lots or the development upon them is
not rendered illegal. Development [Local Planning Scheme] Regulations (i) any relevant local laws relating to
2015), provide the planning policy direction, which town planning.
• To secure utility services to each new lot guides the WAPC in determining subdivision
appropriate for the intended use of the lot. applications. An application for subdivision approval is
made by lodging a Form 1A application
• To provide for the appropriate arrangements
with the WAPC for approval of freehold,
for development contributions, where
3.2 Context and site analysis survey-strata or leasehold (survey-strata)
necessary and relevant, for the orderly and
subdivision. An application for strata or
proper planning of the locality containing the
3.2.1 Subdivision applications should be leasehold (strata) subdivision is to be
subdivision.
submitted with sufficient detail and made on a Form15A.
• To provide for the appropriate arrangements, information as is necessary to enable the
where necessary for planning purposes, for the WAPC to decide on the application. 3.2.3 Both forms set out the information
ceding or transfer of land. required to accompany a subdivision
3.2.2 The Planning and Development application. Upon assessment of an
Regulations 2009 specify the requirements application, further information may be
for making an application for subdivision required to be provided to address site
approval to the WAPC as well as the specific features of a proposal.
matters the WAPC must have regard to in
Western Australian Planning Commission – February 2020

Operational Policy 1.1
3
Subdivision of land – general principles
3.2.4 The purpose of a context analysis is 3.3 Site responsive design 3.3.5 Have regard for the existing and proposed
to ensure that new subdivision and distribution of public open space in the
development is connected to and All subdivisions should be designed so they: immediate locality. Residential lots should
integrated with surrounding natural and be located convenient to areas of public
developed areas, including planned and 3.3.1 Are consistent with the capability of the open space and all lots should be served
committed development for adjacent land and recognise the environmental and by a suitable level of community services,
sites. The context analysis also identifies visual characteristics of the surrounding schools, retail facilities and the like.
key opportunities and constraints area.
3.3.6 Consider the quantity of imported fill in
presented by the site.
3.3.2 Are climate-responsive where topography low lying areas and consider alternative
3.2.5 The WAPC will require sufficiently detailed and other site conditions allow. Avoidance earthwork and drainage strategies that
assessment of the site and its immediate of major earthworks is also supported minimise use of imported fill.
surrounds, in accordance with the relevant as it reduces the demand for basic
policies of the WAPC, demonstrating: raw materials and the loss of remnant
vegetation. Protection of large remnant 3.4 Structure plans
• a sustainable and environmentally
trees, where practicable, is encouraged,
responsive site design, including
both on development sites, as well as in 3.4.1 Structure planning is a process of
response to environmental values onsite
road reserves and open space areas. developing a framework for the integrated
and on adjoining land;
subdivision and development of a major
3.3.3 Respond to the physical characteristics
• the creation of a sense of place and residential, commercial or industrial
of an area including topography, soils,
identity based upon natural and cultural area or an activity centre. Structure plans
drainage, vegetation, natural features and
assets; and are particularly useful to coordinate
visual characteristics of the site. Lot layouts
subdivision and development in areas
• compatible integration of interfaces also need to address site constraints
of fragmented ownership, including
between the development site and optimise orientation to suit energy
with respect to staging and sequencing
and neighbouring land use and efficient housing where possible.
aspects. Structure plans should be
development.
supported by appropriate technical
3.3.4 Protect areas of remnant bushland,
3.2.6 For larger scale subdivisions, for significant mature trees and other documents addressing specific site
example,major urban expansion areas environmentally sensitive areas including characteristics and State planning policies.
or new industrial subdivisions, a more foreshores and flood prone land.
3.4.2 Preparation of a structure plan may be
detailed context and site analysis may be
required under the provisions of a local
necessary.
planning scheme.
Western Australian Planning Commission – February 2020

Operational Policy 1.1
4
Subdivision of land – general principles
3.4.3 Where a structure plan is a requirement 3.5 Super lot subdivisions (d) development contributions, capabilities
of a local planning scheme, it must be and obligations referred to in (c) being
prepared in accordance with the scheme 3.5.1 There is a presumption against ‘super the subject of a record on title pursuant
provisions and have regard for the lot’ subdivision of land holdings which to section 70A of the Transfer of Land
provisions of any regional or sub-regional are identified or zoned for future urban Act 1993, or a legal agreement with
strategy. The Planning and Development purposes and which are already of a the WAPC and/ or any other relevant
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations size suitable for that purpose (generally public authority which shall be binding
2015 contain deemed provisions for the less than 150 hectares) where this could on subsequent owners and supported
preparation and consideration of structure prejudice the orderly and proper planning by caveats lodged by the WAPC to
plans under local planning schemes. A of the land. ensure that prospective purchasers are
structure plan is determined by the WAPC. aware of the commitments.
3.5.2 However, where it can be demonstrated
3.4.4 A structure plan may also be accompanied that a super lot subdivision of a large land 3.5.3 Depending on the degree of need to
by cost-sharing arrangements between holding will not be contrary to the orderly maintain flexibility in the planning of the
landowners for the provision of and proper planning of the land, a super original land holding, the WAPC may
common infrastructure. State Planning lot subdivision may be supported approve the excision of only one super
Policy 3.6 Development Contributions subject to: lot to incorporate the first stage(s) of
for Infrastructure (SPP 3.6) provides development. The subdivision of the
(a) the land being zoned ‘Urban’,
guidance on the scope of development whole of the land holding into super
‘Industrial’, ‘Central City Area’ or
contributions that may be acceptable. lots of 20 hectares or greater may
‘Regional Centre’ in the Metropolitan
Model provisions for development be considered where arrangements
Region Scheme or region planning
contributions in local planning schemes regarding the provision of infrastructure
scheme and appropriately zoned in the
have also been adopted. have been established in accordance with
local planning scheme;
SPP 3.6.
3.4.5 The WAPC will have regard to any (b) the original land holding being given
adopted structure plan and development subdivision approval for at least the 3.5.4 Where development contributions can be
contribution arrangement when first stage of development and actual conveniently made at the time of a super
considering subdivision applications development having commenced; lot subdivision, the WAPC will require
submitted within an area covered by that these be ceded as conditions of
(c) the preparation of a comprehensive
the structure plan or development subdivision, to be either transferred to the
local structure plan in liaison with
contribution arrangement. Crown at that time, or to be the subject of
the local government and to the
a separate legal agreement which ensures
satisfaction of the WAPC, accompanied
the transfer of a site at some future
by a report, which clearly indicates
nominated time.
the development contributions,
capabilities and obligations of each
super lot; and
Western Australian Planning Commission – February 2020

Operational Policy 1.1
5
Subdivision of land – general principles
3.6 Development contributions 3.7 Lawful development building plans being lodged with the
local government. The WAPC may,
3.6.1 The WAPC may impose conditions 3.7.1 Local planning schemes usually where appropriate, impose conditions
requiring development contributions incorporate standards governing the of approval relating to obtaining and
(including the ceding of land) for the development of lots, most commonly implementing development approvals
provision of infrastructure and services through minimum lot size for different required to integrate subdivision and
which are necessary and relevant to the land uses. Also relevant are minimum development.
subdivision. frontage requirements, the need to meet
3.7.4 WAPC approval of a subdivision
setback requirements, and compliance
These contributions may be in the form of: application includes the works necessary
with open space provisions. In areas not
to carry out the subdivision, but it does
• ceding of land for roads, public open subject to an operational scheme, similar
not include approval for subsequent
space, primary school sites, drainage requirements may be contained in local
development on the subdivided lots.
and other public works laws made under the Local Government
Act 1995. For residential development,
• construction of infrastructure works
State Planning Policy 7.3 Residential
which are transferred to public 3.8 Leasehold strata
Design Codes – V1 provides guidance
authorities on completion
on the minimum and average lot sizes of
3.8.1 Under the Strata Titles Act 1985
• monetary contributions to acquire which the WAPC will have due regard.
(as amended) * subdivision may be
land or undertake works by public
3.7.2 Lots that cannot be developed in undertaken as a leasehold scheme
authorities or others
accordance with relevant statutory specified for a fixed term, which may
• rehabilitation of environmentally requirements will not be approved. include the opportunity to postpone the
degraded lands. expiry of the leasehold through the by-
The WAPC will also ensure that, by laws. This can either be leasehold (survey-
The scope and arrangements for creating a new lot, it does not render an strata) or leasehold (strata). Leasehold
development contributions that can be existing lot or development upon that lot schemes are for a fixed term of 20 to 99
required as a condition of subdivision are illegal in terms of statutory requirements. years (inclusive of any postponement).
set out in SPP 3.6. Such matters may include lot sizes,
parking, setbacks or the provision of In considering a leasehold application or
services. an amendment to the leasehold by-laws to
postpone the leasehold term, the WAPC
3.7.3 Residential lots of less than 260m2 in shall consider:
size and/or irregular configuration may
need to demonstrate whether the site
can accommodate a dwelling, through
* Footnote:
a development application and/or All schemes created before the commencement of the
Strata Titles Amendment Act 2018 are freehold schemes.
Western Australian Planning Commission – February 2020

Operational Policy 1.1
6
Subdivision of land – general principles
• the proponent’s request and rationale; 3.9.2 Subdivision may be proposed for land 3.10 Vehicular access
across which there is an existing public
• consistency with the relevant state
utility easement or infrastructure (such as 3.10.1 New lots will be created only where
planning framework for the area; and
high voltage electricity transmission and each lot has, or can be, provided with
• the orderly and proper planning distribution lines, natural gas pipelines, direct frontage access to a constructed
of the area. gas distribution systems, major water, public road, which is connected to the
sewerage mains and drainage). In such road system of the locality. This may
instances the subdivider should negotiate include through common property, as
3.9 Utility services provision with the service provider concerned appropriate. This is to ensure the provision
before lodging an application with the of public utility and other services as well
3.9.1 The WAPC requires that each new lot WAPC and, if possible, reach agreement as to provide vehicular and pedestrian
is provided with an acceptable level of on the: access to the lot. Subdivision and
utility services appropriate for its intended subsequent development should not
• management of relevant risk issues;
use, provided by either a public, or a compromise the safety and function of
licensed private, service provider. The • surrender of the existing easements, existing or proposed regional roads.
level and standard of such services will be if appropriate; and
determined by the WAPC in the context 3.10.2 Where new roads are needed, the
of the intended use, the size of the lot, • the way in which the infrastructure will subdivider will be required to dedicate,
soil conditions, the provisions of the local be protected and/or relocated upon construct and drain these roads to the
planning scheme and the Government subdivision. satisfaction of the WAPC on the advice of
Sewerage Policy 2019, together with the the local government and/or Main Roads
A letter from the agency confirming the
provisions of any other published policy WA. The WAPC may also require existing
arrangements should be supplied with
that may be relevant. roads or rights of way to be widened,
the subdivision application. The WAPC
constructed, upgraded or dedicated to
will normally impose a condition requiring
It is the WAPC’s expectation that each ensuring compliance with this policy.
certification from the servicing agency
strata lot or survey strata lot is to be
concerned that both the surrender of
provided with its own suitable utility
existing easements and protection of
service connection which is protected by
the infrastructure will be undertaken to
easements, where necessary. This is to
the specifications of the agency. This
ensure that each lot is development-ready
condition will normally be imposed unless
and does not result in the need to extend
the WAPC is satisfied that the requirement
services over adjacent strata lots after titles
of the servicing agency is unreasonable.
have been issued.
Western Australian Planning Commission – February 2020

Operational Policy 1.1
7
Subdivision of land – general principles
3.11 Capability for development 4. Implementation 4.2 Reviews
3.11.1 All new lots should be physically capable of policy 4.2.1 Should the applicant seek a review
of development for their intended of a WAPC decision, two avenues are
purpose. available:
4.1 Procedures
3.11.2 To ensure that all new lots are physically • request the WAPC to reconsider the
capable of development, the WAPC 4.1.1 Applications to the WAPC, for the refusal or condition/s of approval, in
may require various works/actions to be subdivision of land should be made on accordance with s144 or s151 of the
undertaken including the land being filled the appropriate Form and include such Planning and Development Act 2005
and drained, connection to an external information as is required, having regard • lodge an application to the State
system of drainage or construction of to the scale and context of the proposal. Administrative Tribunal in accordance
a driveway and/or access road, before with s251 of the Planning and
a lot title is created. In some instances, As required by the relevant legislation, Development Act 2005.
the provision of a geotechnical and/or the WAPC will forward a copy of each
hydrological report may be required to subdivision application to any government
evaluate the physical suitability of land to agency, local government, utility service
4.3 Compliance with
sustain an activity. The Institute of Public provider or public body whose powers or
Works Engineering Australasia (IPWEA) functions may be affected for comments subdivision approvals
Local Government Guidelines for Sub and recommendations. The responses
4.3.1 Following approval of a subdivision
Divisional Development October 2017 will be considered by the WAPC in
application, the applicant is to make
(edition 2.3) provides relevant standards. determining an application and may form
arrangements in liaison with relevant
The WAPC obtains advice from the conditions of approval.
government agencies, local government
local government and relevant referral
and utility service providers, to comply
authorities, in respect to the development
with any conditions imposed.
capability of the land.
When the WAPC is satisfied all conditions
have been complied with, it will endorse
3.12 Other policy requirements the diagram of survey prior to the issue
of a certificate of title(s) by the Registrar
3.12.1 The WAPC’s SPP 1 includes other policies
of Titles.
dealing with the subdivision of land into
lots for specific land uses. The policies
contain the requirements of the WAPC
and should be read in conjunction with
this policy.
Western Australian Planning Commission – February 2020