Development Control Policy 1.8
Canal estates and artificial waterway developments
May 2012
Contents 7.3 Layout for navigation safety 13
7.4 Moorings, jetties and launching ramps 14
7.5 Property frontage to waterways 15
1. Citation 1
7.6 Flood mitigation 15
2. Background 1 7.7 Soil stability 15
7.8 Cyclonic areas 15
3. Introduction 1
7.9 Coastal and estuarine or river impacts 16
4. Objectives 1 7.10 Maintenance dredging 16
7.11 Water circulation 16
5. Preliminary consultation 1
7.12 Public open space 17
5.1 Information for preliminary consultation 2
5.2 Role and information requirements of 8. Guidelines for water quality management 18
agencies 3 8.1 Environmental quality management
5.2.1 WAPC and Department of Planning 3 framework 18
5.2.2 Department of Transport 3 8.1.1 Water and sediment
quality indicators 19
5.2.3 Department of Environment and
Conservation 3 8.1.2 Establishing the quality of the
adjacent natural waterway, water
5.2.3.1 Cockburn Sound
body or source groundwater 19
Management Council 5
8.1.3 Compliance with environmental
5.2.4 Swan River Trust 5
quality objectives for artificial
5.2.5 Department of Water 5
waterways 20
5.2.6 Environmental Protection Authority 5
8.1.4 Compliance with environmental
5.2.7 Office of the Environmental
quality objectives for water and
Protection Authority 6
sediment quality in adjacent
5.2.8 Department of Health 6 natural waterway or water body 20
5.2.9 Department of Fisheries 6 8.1.5 General aesthetic guidelines 21
5.2.10 Local government 6 8.1.6 Maintenance of artificial
5.2.11 Other agencies 7 waterway water quality by
natural process 21
6. Approvals 7 8.1.7 Stormwater runoff and drainage 21
6.1 General 7 8.1.8 Industrial and residential waste 21
6.2 Region planning scheme 8 8.1.9 Vessel sullage 22
6.3 Local planning scheme 8 8.1.10 Impact on fauna and flora 22
6.4 Environmental assessment process 9 8.2 Artificial waterway flushing 22
6.5 Subdivision 10
6.6 Other approvals 10
6.7 Deed of agreement 11
7. Guidelines for the design of boat harbours,
marinas and canal estates 12
7.1 Dimensions of artificial waterways 12
7.2 Canal walls and breakwaters 13
Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 i

Appendix
Appendix 1
Summary of procedures for assessment of
canal estates and artificial waterway
developments 23
Appendix 2
Canal zone in a local planning scheme 24
Appendix 3
Agency/proponent responsibilities and
relevant legislation for canal estates and
artificial waterway developments 26
Appendix 4
Definitions 45
Disclaimer
This document has been published by the Western
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation,
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the
government, its employees and agents are not liable for any
damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result of
action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect of
any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before
applying the information contained in this document to
particular circumstances.
© State of Western Australia
Published by the
Western Australian Planning Commission
Gordon Stephenson House
140 William Street
Perth WA 6000
Locked Bag 2506
Perth WA 6001
Published May 2012
website: www.planning.wa.gov.au
email: corporate@planning.wa.gov.au
tel: 08 655 19000
fax: 08 655 19001
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
infoline: 1800 626 477
Western Australian Planning Commission owns all
photography in this document unless otherwise stated. This
document is available in alternative formats on application
to Communication Services.
ii Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 1
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
1. Citation • developments incorporating artificial
waterways or lakes designed for navigation
as well as ornamental and recreational
This policy is Development Control Policy
purposes; and
1.8 Canal Estates and Artificial Waterway
Developments, reviewed under Part 2 of the • private water frontage abutting or over
Planning and Development Act 2005. waterways.
2. Background
4. Objectives
The Western Australian Planning Commission
Policy objectives are:
(WAPC) adopted a policy on this matter on
10 December 1991, which was the result of • establishing a consistent and coordinated
review of a previously endorsed Cabinet policy. approach to the assessment of proposals
Operation of the policy and experience of the for canal estates and artificial waterways;
development of canal estates were reviewed and
in 1998, and from 2007 to 2011. Emphasis has • establishing ongoing management and
been on clarifying roles and responsibilities
maintenance responsibilities for canal
of State government agencies and affected
estates and artificial waterways.
stakeholders.
This policy supersedes Development Control 5. Preliminary consultation
Policy 1.8 Canal Estates and Other Artificial
Waterway Developments (February 1999).
Given the wide range of issues involved in
proposals for canal estates and artificial
Related State planning legislation, policies, waterways, it is in the proponents’ interest to
strategies, guidelines, planning bulletins and conduct a round of preliminary consultations
Australian standards are listed under Appendix with local government and other relevant
3 as they apply to various State government agencies.
agencies and affected stakeholders.
Proponents should have preliminary
3. Introduction discussions with agencies such as
Department of Planning, Department of
This policy sets out requirements of the WAPC Transport, Department of Environment and
for assessment of canal estate proposals. Conservation, Swan River Trust, Cockburn
General principles and procedures to be Sound Management Council, Office of the
considered by those proposing to undertake Environmental Protection Authority, Department
canal estate projects are set out in the of Water, Department of Health, Department of
associated guidelines. Regional Development and Lands, Department
of Fisheries and the applicable local
government prior to lodging a formal proposal
This policy and guidelines applies to canal
that includes canal estates and/or artificial
estate developments which propose to
waterways.
incorporate artificial waterways. The general
principles of the policy and guidelines also
apply to: Early consultation will be necessary to establish
various government agency requirements to be
• marinas and harbours, whether as a
addressed over the design stage of the project.
result of construction of breakwaters into
Requirements include:
natural water bodies or by dredging inland
harbours; • the level of detail of relevant and adequate
information to enable proposals to be
considered;

• staging of requirements for engineering and (2) sources of funding; and
planning design guidelines;
(3) obligations of the proponent, local
• approach for best practice water governments, lot owners and other
management; relevant State government agencies.
• documentation to supplement rezoning of • A basic concept plan showing approximate
marinas and canal estates; and shape of proposed waterways, mooring
envelopes and connecting channels, and
• scoping content for a deed of agreement.
proposals for subdivision, land use and
development (including preliminary building
It is expected that proponents in this process footprints, bulk and scale form).
will consult with all affected authorities and
• Preliminary hydrodynamic analysis
obtain general advice from those authorities on
demonstrating that flushing rates will be
the level of detail required for the proposal to
adequate to maintain acceptable water
be assessed.
quality.
It will also be necessary to determine whether • Basic hydraulic, environmental, geotechnical
or not the local government is prepared to and ecological studies showing perceived
initiate an amendment to its local planning impact of development on the natural and
scheme to have the land appropriately zoned physical features, and processes of the site
for the purpose proposed. and its environs including any public health
implications.
5.1 Information for preliminary • A map showing natural and proposed
consultation waterways and drainage lines.
• Relevant floodplain mapping showing the
This section identifies requirements in addition
floodway and flood fringe.
to those specific to each agency listed under
• A map showing any low-lying seasonally
section 5.2, and the information required
inundated breeding areas for mosquitoes
for subdivision applications to the WAPC,
in close proximity to the proposal. Approval
development proposals under relevant local
for mosquito control measures in areas
government town planning Scheme provisions
managed by the Department of Environment
and Scheme amendments.
and Conservation will be required from the
Department.
Proponents are to provide sufficient information
to enable informed discussions to take place • Preliminary analysis and mapping of native
between the proponent, local government vegetation, flora and fauna, threatened flora
and other relevant agencies. The following and fauna records, threatened and priority
information is recommended. ecological communities, classification and
management category of any wetlands
• A costed 25-year maintenance plan that in Department of Environment and
includes: Conservation datasets and nationally and
internationally listed wetlands’.
(1) costs of maintenance, dredging
(including dredge spoil treatment- • Preliminary Health Impact Assessment
disposal and management), to Department of Health requirements
environmental monitoring and including and not limited to, potential
management (including contingency for disturbance of acid sulphate soils,
management strategies) to be disturbing mineral deposits and radon gas
implemented if environmental quality formation.
objectives are not met, and maritime
structure maintenance;
2 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 3
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
• Any other information that may be If a proposal is acceptable in broad principle,
reasonably requested by an agency or local the Department of Transport will be asked to
government at this stage of the process. comment on the objections above and those
set out below to assist in more detailed design
work:
5.2 Roles and information
• sea level rise (SLR) in accordance with State
requirements of agencies
Planning Policy 2.6;
(Refer to Appendix 3).
• artificial waterway design and stability
(including walls, banks and revetments);
5.2.1 WAPC and Department of Planning • entrance design and stability;
• siltation rates;
It is recommended that a copy of the concept
plans and supporting documentation be • navigation requirements;
provided to the WAPC and the matter be
• tide and storm surge levels;
discussed with officers of the Department
• mooring design requirements; and
of Planning. These preliminary consultations
will draw attention to any concerns relating • other relevant matters as applicable to the
to the project or any issues that need to be proposal.
addressed in the formulation of a detailed
proposal. The Department of Planning will
5.2.3 Department of Environment and
provide a coordinating role by arranging joint Conservation
meetings and discussions between affected
parties when and where appropriate. The The Department of Environment and
WAPC is responsible for amendment of region Conservation should be consulted at an early
planning schemes, approval of local planning stage. This is necessary to ensure there are
scheme amendments, endorsement of local no overriding environmental constraints that
structure plans and approval of subdivision. could prohibit the proposed development
Appendix 1 shows the dual process where from proceeding, and to assist the proponent
the Environmental Protection Authority is identify environmental principles to be
also involved with the statutory assessment incorporated in development concept designs.
process. The proponent should identify environmental
issues and determine potential environmental
impacts of the proposal.
5.2.2 Department of Transport
Information required in this section should Prior to the EPA setting the level of assessment
be sufficient for the Department of Transport on a scheme or proposal that relates to a canal
to advise the proponent, as to whether estate or waterway development, the OEPA will
fundamental objections to the proposal exist. generally request the DEC’s advice.
Objections may arise or be the result of:
The Department will usually require a
• impact on coastal processes, such as
description of environmental quality
changes to the littoral drift regime at the
management framework (see section 8) for
entrance channel and their consequences
the canal estate or artificial waterway and
for subsequent management;
adjacent natural waterways; environmental
• exposure to damage by tide and storm values to be protected; environmental quality
surge levels; and objectives; levels of protection; frequency of
monitoring and environmental quality criteria to
• navigation problems.
be achieved;

• current and/or anticipated water quality regard to both excavation and land-based
(particularly nutrient and contaminant levels) dredge disposal, and to include:
and its management, involving natural or
– likely extent and severity of acid sulphate
artificial flushing or water exchange;
soils,
• coastal, estuarine or river environments
– potential impacts on surface and
and potential for impacts upon those
groundwater quality and quantity,
environments;
– potential impacts on ecosystems and
• native vegetation, flora and fauna habitat,
biodiversity,
including waterbird habitat protected by
Commonwealth or International treaty – potential impacts on infrastructure, and
agreements;
– cumulative impacts;
• impacts from construction and operational
• likely extent of monosulfidic sediments
activities on marine fauna, marine fauna
accumulation in poorly flushed estuaries
habitats, benthic primary producer habitats
and waterways that may be disturbed by
and significance of species and habitats
artificial waterway development;
affected;
• maintenance dredging of acid sulphate
• description of wetland classification and
soil sediments, their disposal and spoil
management category from Department
management;
datasets; identification of conservation
• quality of dredge spoil, in particular for
category wetlands; wetlands of national
heavy metals and hydrocarbons (required
and international importance including
for assessment of the impacts of both
Ramsar-listed wetlands; description of likely
onshore and offshore disposal methods);
impacts on wetland water regime; regional
groundwater and surface water interactions • waste disposal with particular regard to
with local groundwater; and assessment disposal of wastewater (including vacuum or
of system functions based on hydrological gravity sewage infrastructure proposed) and
studies; contaminated surface water run-off; and
• identification of any lands or waters • land clearing of native vegetation (Including
gazetted and managed by the Department Indigenous aquatic and terrestrial
under the Conservation and Land vegetation) and potential Impacts
Management Act 1984 within footprint and on biodiversity and potential loss of
proximity of the proposed development; biodiversity.
a description of how the values of these
If the Department of Environment and
areas will be affected; and consideration
Conservation is aware of a fundamental
of consistency with the relevant area
constraint to the proposal, it will advise
management plan(s);
the proponent of that constraint. In such
• prospective impact upon groundwater circumstances, the proponent should
reserves and such other matters as not proceed unless action can be taken
saltwater intrusion and drawdown; impacts to overcome that constraint. The lack of
from drawdown and/or saltwater intrusion identification of a fundamental constraint by
on groundwater dependent ecosystems and the Department or any other agency during the
wetlands; early consultation phase does not necessarily
mean that the project is cleared of significant
• likely extent of and distribution of acid
issues, particularly when deficient information
sulphate soils on the land; potential for
is provided or there are substantial proposal
acid regeneration; and capacity of the land
modifications.
to sustain proposed development, having
4 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 5
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Any development adversely impacting upon • management of stormwater and drainage;
important conservation areas, including and
habitats for endangered species and species of
• impact on natural waterways estuaries,
high conservation significance, is unlikely to be
groundwater aquifers and water quality.
supported.
The Departments of Water will need to be
consulted regarding flood levels, dewatering,
dredging, effluent disposal, provision of
5.2.3.1 Cockburn Sound
pollution control equipment, stormwater Management Council
management, and licence for a bore or well and
The Cockburn Sound Management Council potential impacts of proposals on aquatic and
is responsible for implementing the State riparian habitats. Approvals are required under
Environmental (Cockburn Sound) Policy 2005, provisions of the Waterways Conservation Act
Environmental Management Plan 2005 and 1976 and the Rights in Water and Irrigation Act
associated environmental quality criteria, and 1914.
will need to be consulted for proposals within
Cockburn Sound and Owen Anchorage. The above information should be provided to
the Department of Water in the relevant water
management report according to WAPC’s
‘Better Urban Water Management’ document
5.2.4 Swan River Trust
(WAPC, 2008).
The Swan River Trust should be consulted
where any proposed development is located
within or abutting the Trust Development
5.2.6 Environmental Protection Authority
Control Area boundary or is likely to affect
waters within this area. Approvals may be The Environmental Protection Authority
required under the Swan and Canning Rivers provides advice to the Minister for Environment
Management Act 2006. regarding environmental protection in the State
and for conducting environmental impact
assessments for planning schemes and
significant development proposals as required
5.2.5 Department of Water
under the Environmental Protection Act 1986.
The Department of Water is concerned
primarily with the impact of artificial channels Section 38 of the Environmental Protection
on natural receiving bodies and regulation Act 1986 requires the WAPC and any
under the Rights in Water and Irrigation Act other decision-making authority to refer
1914 and Waterways Conservation Act 1976 to the Environmental Protection Authority
where these apply. Consultation with the any proposal application that is likely, if
Department at an early stage is encouraged implemented, to have a significant effect on the
to discuss impacts on natural waterways, environment. This includes any canal estate
licensing requirements and to assist the or marina proposal that is environmentally
proponent identify principles to be incorporated significant and affects environmental values
in development concept designs. mentioned in this document.
The Department of Water will usually require a If a proposal for a canal estate is referred to
description of: the Authority, it is required to make a decision
on whether or not to assess the proposal, and
• impact on general flooding regime;
if so, the level of assessment. If it decides
• exposure to flooding and flood damage;
to formally assess a proposal, it will do so

using levels of assessment and assessment medium Mosquito risk shall require a Mosquito
procedures set out in the Environmental Impact management plan.
Assessment Administrative Procedures 2010.
Water quality is of concern in respect to
The Planning and Development Act 2005 and pollution through illegal disposal of raw
the Environmental Protection Act 1986 require sewage within waterways and subsequent
that all planning schemes (including scheme contamination. It will ensure that potential
amendments) be referred by the responsible public health risks caused by the development
authority to the Environmental Protection are properly identified, assessed and managed
Authority for a decision on whether or not the to ensure its relevant objectives are satisfied.
scheme should be formally assessed. This
would include any schemes which contemplate
5.2.9 Department of Fisheries
a canal estate or artificial waterway as a future
land use. Allowing environmental issues to The Department of Fisheries has responsibility
be considered ‘upfront’ during the scheme for fish habitat, aquatic environment protection,
formulation process ensures that environmental fisheries management, fish health and the
factors are given proper consideration by the prevention of marine pest incursions. In line
Authority and the responsible authority before with these responsibilities, it provides advice
subdivision and development occur. on development projects which have potential
to impact these sectors, which include coastal
developments such as canal estates.
5.2.7 Office of the Environmental
Protection Authority
5.2.10 Local government
The Office of the Environmental Protection
Authority was established on 27 November The local government should be requested to
2009 to support the Environmental Protection advise whether the proposal meets general
Authority in conducting environmental impact planning and engineering criteria, and the
assessments and developing policies to circumstances under which it would be
protect the environment. The Office also prepared to proceed with an amendment to its
monitors compliance with ministerial conditions town planning scheme (ie. land rezoning) when
related to approvals. formally requested to do so.
The Office should be consulted as early as Long-term maintenance of public areas
possible during the planning stages to identify such as waterways, connecting channels,
the most suitable mechanism and process breakwaters, and artificial waterway walls and
by which a canal estate or artificial waterway embankments where these abut land set aside
development may be best considered by the for use by the public at large, will normally be
Authority under the Environmental Protection the responsibility of local government. Local
Act 1986. government will need to be satisfied regarding
economic viability of the proposal and the
local government’s financial capacity to meet
5.2.8 Department of Health
ongoing water and canal wall-monitoring and
The Department of Health is to be consulted in maintenance costs. Proponents shall provide
the process, as it considers land use activities projected short and long-term costs related
and evaluates risks to humans in the new to capital works and maintenance for local
community. Examples of risks include the government assessment.
possible location of residential canal housing
in close proximity to mosquito-breeding areas The proponent will normally be responsible
that can lead to high risk of disease infection for maintenance of the entire project for
such as Ross River Virus. Proposals located the initial period (normally five years), apart
within areas designated to have a high to from those responsibilities assumed by
6 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 7
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
purchasers of lots within the canal estate. 6. Approvals
Additional responsibilities may include the
payment of specified area rates to provide 6.1 General
the local government with additional financial
contributions to undertake long term
The general procedure for approval, including
maintenance of the canal estate or artificial
environmental assessment, to develop a canal
waterway development.
estate or other artificial waterway is shown in a
flow diagram at Appendix 1.
Local government may liaise with State
government agencies in regard to obtaining
Zoning
information that the local government
The site area of the proposal shall be zoned
considers relevant when deciding whether
for urban land use under a region planning
to proceed with a scheme amendment and
scheme where a region scheme applies to
subsequent approvals.
the subject land. An amendment to the local
planning scheme to rezone the subject land
5.2.11 Other agencies
to an appropriate zone including applicable
provisions following the gazettal of any region
In addition to prior consultations, it will, in
planning scheme amendment is required. A
particular circumstances, be appropriate to
local planning scheme amendment proposal
confer with other authorities, for example, the
requires a scheme amendment report to be
Department of Indigenous Affairs may require
prepared, which includes a concept plan of the
an Aboriginal heritage survey in accordance
development and any other details required
with the Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972. The
by the local government in support of the
Department of Mines and Petroleum shall be
proponents request to rezone the subject land.
consulted to ascertain whether the proposal
is located within a designated mineral field
A prerequisite to rezoning will be the
in accordance with the Mining Act 1978 and
requirement for the proponent to enter into
Land Administration Act 1997. In cases of likely
a draft deed of agreement with the local
environmental impacts of national significance,
government concerning future waterways
for example, proposals in close proximity to
management. The deed will need to state
Ramsar wetlands, consultation is required
the waterways manager and be endorsed by
with the Commonwealth Department of
all affected parties prior to the amendment
Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population
being finalised. The deed shall be flexible
and Communities under the Environment
to accommodate provision for any matters
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation
determined by the WAPC arising from
Act 1999.The Heritage Council of Western
subsequent planning stages, such as Australia should also be consulted in regard
structure plan subdivision/survey strata and
to proposals, or in close proximity to places
development assessment processes. listed on the State Register of Heritage Places.
Also, consultation is recommended with
Information supplied shall accord with the key
infrastructure servicing authorities, such as
stages shown the flow chart in Appendix 1.
Western Power for electrical provision and
All parties are expected to apply reasonable
infrastructure upgrading and Water Corporation
judgment related to the characteristics of the
for sewerage and reticulated water servicing
particular proposal to ensure that the level of
and infrastructure upgrading.
information is provided at the appropriate stage
of the planning process.

Local Structure Plan 6.3 Local planning scheme
A Local Structure Plan may be required to be
prepared and approved by the local government The following represent principal matters which
and the WAPC as a prerequisite to subdivision may be covered by a local planning scheme
and/or development. The requirement to and accompanying local structure plan, outline
prepare a local structure plan will be identified development or subdivision guide plans (draft
during the local scheme amendment process. model scheme text provisions for the Canal
Zone are shown in Appendix 2):
• information describing the existing
Subdivision environment (social, physical and biological)
Approvals to subdivide land and to commence of the development area and environs
and carry out development will be considered and the potential environmental impacts
(refer section 157 and 170 of the Planning and of the proposed development, as well as
Development Act 2005) following finalisation contingency management strategies for
of the region and local planning scheme mitigation potential environmental impacts.
amendments and a local structure plan. Information should be sufficiently detailed
to assist the Environmental Protection
Authority to determine whether the
Environmental Approvals
amendment warrants formal environmental
If a region and/or local scheme amendment
assessment;
has been formally assessed by the EPA then
• a submission showing all of the matters
a Ministerial Statement is issued under the
believed by the proponent to be the basis
Environmental Protection Act 1986. Further
upon which a deed of agreement can be
environmental approvals are likely to be
entered into with the local government
required at subsequent planning stages,
(or alternative waterways manager). State
particularly at the local structure plan stage.
government agencies may also be parties to
the deed of agreement at their discretion;
6.2 Region planning scheme • building densities (based upon net
developable area of dry lot);
The WAPC may amend a region planning • layout of subdivision and/or development
scheme in one of two ways: scale/form for land within the canal estate;
(1) as a substantial or ‘‘major’’ amendment; or • layout of mooring envelopes within artificial
waterways;
(2) as a non-substantial or ‘‘minor’ ‘amendment.
• location of lot boundaries in relation to
retaining walls;
Canal estate developments will be dealt with
as major amendments due to their complex • artificial waterways, connecting channels
and technical nature. A proposal deemed and the water body to which connection is
to be a minor variation to an existing canal to be made;
development may, in the opinion of the WAPC,
• land to be ceded to the Crown as such as
be considered a minor amendment. The
waterways, foreshore reserves and public
Planning and Development Act 2005 provides
open space;
opportunity for the simultaneous amendment of
a local planning scheme where a region scheme • siting of buildings with particular reference
is amended. to flood levels and to artificial waterway
banks;
The process for amending a region planning
• ramps and hoists;
scheme is set out in part 4 of the Planning and
Development Act 2005.
8 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 9
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
• pump-out facilities for non-residential vessel environmental issues raised in the submissions.
moorings; The EPA then prepares an assessment report
to the Minister for the Environment, making
• a local water management strategy in
recommendations as it sees fit. The report is
accordance with the WAPC’s ‘Better
publicly released and copies are forwarded to
Urban Water Management ‘(WAPC,
the responsible authority, any decision-making
2008) framework to support the scheme
authorities, the minister responsible and any
amendment and/or structure plan and
other minister concerned.
demonstrate that water can be managed
appropriately onsite;
The contents of the report, including
• particulars of any proposed sea bed lease recommended conditions, are subject to
and Torrens title within the project area; and third party appeal to the Minister for the
• other matters covered by Schedule 7 of the Environment. If appeal rights are exercised,
Planning and Development Act 2005 which the amendment cannot be implemented while
the local government deems appropriate. the appeal is pending. The Minister for the
Environment consults with the Minister for
Planning prior to setting any environmental
Initiation of a local planning scheme is set out
conditions to be incorporated in the
in Part 5 of the Planning and Development
amendment.
Act 2005. The process for a local scheme
amendment is set out in the Town Planning
Alternatively, a development proposal may be
Regulations 1967.
referred under section 38 of the Environmental
Protection Act 1986 for a decision on
6.4 Environmental assessment whether to assess the proposal. Generally, a
process development proposal would only be referred
under this section 38:
Following resolution of the WAPC to amend a
• a corresponding scheme or rezoning has
region scheme and/or the local government to
not been assessed under section 48A;
amend its local planning scheme, sections 38
• it does not comply with requirements and
and 81 of the Planning and Development Act
conditions of the assessed scheme;
2005 require referral of the amendment to the
Environmental Protection Authority. • it is of a prescribed class which causes
pollution;
Upon receipt of sufficient information,
• it raises environmental factors not
the Authority will determine whether the
addressed in the scheme assessment; or
amendment warrants formal environmental
assessment, and if so, at what level (under • the Environmental Protection Authority did
section 48A of the Environmental Protection not have sufficient scientific or technical
Act 1986), or whether it is incapable of being information at the time it assessed the
environmentally acceptable. If an amendment scheme to assess all environmental factors
warrants formal assessment, the Authority will raised by the proposed development.
issue instructions regarding scope and content
to be addressed by the responsible authority
If the Authority decides to formally assess
preparing the environmental review. The
a proposal, it will do so using the levels of
environmental review must be advertised with
assessment and assessment procedures set
the amendment during the public submission
out in the Environmental Impact Assessment
period.
Administrative Procedures 2010. Canal estate
developments are likely to require formal
At the end of the public submission period,
assessment by the Authority.
the responsible authority is required to inform
the Authority of its views and response to the

The Waterways Conservation Act 1976 makes • public open space and other reserves; and
provision for conservation and management
• such other matters as the WAPC may
of certain waters and of associated land and
determine in consultation with local
environment. The Act applies to declared
government and State government
waterways (currently the Peel-Harvey Estuary,
agencies.
Wilson Inlet and Albany Harbour).
Furthermore, provisions of the Act regarding These conditions should accord with
regulatory licensing apply only to certain requirements of the appropriate authority
activities such as dredging, disposal and nominated in the approval processes set out in
reclamation activities within the management this policy.
area. Approvals under the Act should not
occur before or interfere with the Authority’s 6.6 Other approvals
consideration of a proposal. Should it decide
to formally assess, approvals under the Act will
If the project is in a declared waterways
follow the Minister for Environment’s approval
management area, the proponent is required
and conditions, and be consistent with such
to obtain a dredging licence from the relevant
an approval and conditions. The Minister for
agency prior to any dredging or reclamation
Water and the Department of Water are to be
being carried out, in accordance with the
consulted on any proposal within a declared
Waterways Conservation Act 1976.
waterways management authority area.
Under the Rights in Water and Irrigation Act
6.5 Subdivision 1914, the taking of water for activities (e.g.
dewatering, dust suppression, irrigation of
The proponent should not lodge subdivision or public open space) within a proclaimed area
applications for planning approval prior to the must be undertaken in accordance with a valid
Minister granting final approval to a scheme water licence. Another licence will be required
amendment, and until a structure plan for the to construct or alter any wells from which
subject land (if required under the scheme groundwater will be taken. A permit will be
amendment)) have been endorsed by the local required to interfere with bed and banks or to
government and the WAPC. take water from a watercourse. Applications
for licences and/or permits are made to the
Conditions of subdivision will normally address:
Department of Water.
• construction of artificial waterways;
The Department’s policy requires that
• filling of land;
proponents applying to draw large amounts of
• construction of artificial waterway banks,
water must prepare an operating strategy or
retaining walls and artificial waterway and
management plan demonstrating how effects
navigation structures;
to the aquifer, surrounding environment and
• maintenance plans for dredging, disposal other users will be managed. Water quality
and acid sulphate soils; monitoring is usually required and water is
often treated before being released back to the
• management plans for environmental
aquifer or waterway. Groundwater modelling is
matters such as acid sulphate soil
sometimes required for large projects.
management, and control of nutrients,
pesticides algal accumulation and insects;
Where a natural watercourse or collection of
• environmental management plans for water is being modified to allow development
impacted wetlands and buffers, flora and in a proclaimed area, a bed and banks permit
fauna; will be required.
• emergency, public or resident access along
canal waterways;
10 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 11
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
A Notice of No Objection may be required • transfer of the ‘waterway’ area at no cost to
from the Commissioner for Soil and Land the Crown for subsequent vesting;
Conservation. Preparation of a nutrient and
• construct, including a development
irrigation management plan, a dredging and
contribution plan in accordance with State
dredge spoil disposal management plan and a
Planning Policy 3.6, monitor and maintain
conservation and foreshore management plan
specific artificial waterway and channel
will also normally be required.
works;
Where native vegetation on-site is proposed • monitor and manage water quality to
to be cleared (including marine), it will be specified requirements;
necessary to obtain a native vegetation clearing • identify funding sources for construction
permit, unless the clearing is exempt under and maintenance work referred to above,
schedule 6 of the Environmental Protection which may include a development
Act 1986 or exempt under the Environmental contribution plan where necessary, and
Protection (Clearing of Native Vegetation) which will require amendment to the local
Regulations 2004. planning scheme for implementation;
• remain a party to the agreement until at
Approvals are required under the Wildlife
least five years after the date of practical
Conservation Act 1950 for the taking of native
completion of the project; should there be
flora and fauna.
a recurring problem, this period may be
extended yearly with WAPC approval;
Developments that occur within marine parks
or reserves may require approval under the • apply the deed of agreement to each
Conservation and Land Management Act 1984. stage of a development involving artificial
waterways;
The Commonwealth Department of
• provide a sustainable maintenance program
Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population
including obligations for water quality
and Communities advise on the need for
and sediment monitoring programmes,
referral of a proposal under the Environment
monitoring water depths (ie. hydro graphic
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
surveys), dredging, monitoring erosion or
1999.
accretion of shorelines associated with the
waterways;
Government agencies should be consulted that
• provide maintenance bonds;
have applicable legislation, and policies and
procedures that need to be followed are listed • provide waterways headwork contributions;
in Appendix 3.
• make arrangements regarding source of
revenue for ongoing maintenance; and
6.7 Deed of agreement
• provide a bank guarantee against default of
the above commitments and to cover any
The purpose of the deed of agreement between
defects which may become evident during
the local government and the proponent is to
the period of the developer’s obligation.
agree to:
• establish the environmental values,
• undertake development within a defined
environmental quality objectives, levels of
period;
ecological protection and environmental
• provide a feasibility assessment of the quality criteria for the artificial and
proposal (Refer to section 5.1); adjacent natural waterways or water
bodies and which define the objectives for
• identification of the local government as the
management; and
waterways manager and any other party to
the agreement;

• describe contingency management Guidance for the design of boat harbours
strategies that will be implemented if the and marinas can be found in AS 3962 2001:
environmental quality objectives are not Guidelines for the Design of Marinas. However,
met. these guidelines are not wholly applicable to
canal estates, and do not include particular
local requirements. Western Australian design
Determine the extent to which local laws,
standards are currently based upon a 1 in
vessel mooring management plan and
100 Annual Exceedence Probability (1%
cyclone contingency plans may be required in
AEP) event. Proponents of canal/marinas are
consultation with relevant State government
encouraged to voluntary adopt standards
agencies, including Department of Transport,
above 1% AEP and that the design standard
Department of Planning and State Emergency
be, via legal instrument, stated on lot/strata
Service.
titles.
Funding sources of revenue may include
The following supplementary guidelines have
fees paid for use of public facilities such as
been prepared.
boat launching ramps, marine pen fees and
commercial leases, lump sum payments
made by the developer, and rating revenue
via general, special area or differential rating 7.1 Dimensions of artificial
methods. waterways
A costed 25 year maintenance plan/feasibility To define navigable widths and depths for
assessment to be finalized by the completion artificial waterways, lateral loads on mooring
of the State government planning process. structures and dimensions of mooring areas, a
‘design vessel’ (the largest vessel expected to
The deed of agreement may not be required use the waterway) should be selected to guide
to address all environmental issues, as these the design of the artificial waterway.
will be the subject of development under the
Environmental Protection Act 1986. Table 1 lists recommended sizes for a design
vessel. These sizes are based on draughts
The level of detail of items listed in section 6.7 appropriate to yachts, and beams appropriate
can be addressed in consultation with local to power boats.
government and State government agencies.
There should be flexibility for inclusion of Table 1: Design vessel sizes
any other relevant matters that apply to the
Boat length Beam Draught
particular proposal.
(metres) (metres) (metres)
6 2.8 1.4 (0.8)*
8 3.4 1.5 (0.9)*
10 4.0 1.8 (1.0)*
7. Guidelines for the design of
12 4.4 2.0 (1.0)*
boat harbours, marinas and
15 5.0 2.5 (1.2)*
canal estates 18 5.4 2.7 (1.4)*
20 5.7 2.9 (1.5)*
These guidelines should be applied to the *It is possible that some inland canal estates
rezoning, local structure plan and subdivision may cater for small power boats only. If this
application process as required. Responsible is the case, these reduced draughts may be
agencies should be consulted to clarify acceptable. (Source: AS 3962 2001, Australian
the nature, extent and timing of particular Standards)
requirements. Canal estates, boat harbours
and marinas have some features which do not
exist in conventional subdivisions.
12 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 13
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
The depth of clear fairway and mooring areas • beam to moorings only are permitted in
below Chart Datum shall be: main navigation channels.
• not less than 1.0 metres;
The length and cross-section of any artificial
• not greater than the associated natural
waterway shall relate hydraulically so that non-
water body;
scouring currents exist at the entrance and in
• not less than the maximum draught of the the artificial waterways (note that this will be
design vessel plus: dependent on soil type and bank construction).
– half the predicted wave height;
The Department of water provides technical
– 0.3 metres for soft bed or 0.5 metres for
advice (e.g. local government authorities,
a rock bed;
developers and Department of Planning) to
– allowance for siltation that matches the incorporate into the approval process.
proposed maintenance dredging regime.
• The width of the navigation fairway shall be
These currents are to be conservatively
no less than 15 metres. In a Canal Zone the
assessed against any annual event, and
width shall be:
may be limiting only at the 1 in 100 Annual
– measured from boundaries of mooring
Exceedence Probability (1% AEP) event.
envelopes and (in the case of sloping
walls) from the navigation depth contour,
7.2 Canal walls and breakwaters
whichever is appropriate;
– twice the length of design vessel
For all artificial waterways, all land retaining
between the limits of the mooring
structures and breakwaters shall:
envelopes;
• be designed to resist damaging erosion by
– increased if more than 20 residential
wind, current and wave action for a 1 in 100
moorings are upstream of any channel
Annual Exceedence Probability (1% AEP)
cross section.
event.
• be geotechnical stable under expected
The width across water between property
range of active loads including earth loads,
boundaries in a Canal Zone should not be less
earthquake, hydrodynamic loads, building,
than 30 metres. traffic and construction surcharges;
• minimise maintenance requirements as far
Mooring areas in a Canal Zone should be
as practicable; and
identified in an overall mooring arrangement
plan that depicts the design vessel for each lot, • take account of predicted climate change
all mooring areas, navigation clearances, and sea level rise under State Coastal Planning
signage. Mooring areas should comply with the Policy 2.6.
following requirements:
• mooring envelope shall be shown in
7.3 Layout for navigation safety
the artificial waterway at each property
boundary, of sufficient size to contain all
It can be assumed that a vessel speed of five
jetties, mooring piles and the design boat;
knots or less will be required within the artificial
• for single residential lots, lot width and waterways system. While power boats may be
mooring location shall be such that the in the majority, use of canoes, rowing dinghies
moored vessel is entirely in the water area and small sail boats must be expected.
bounded by the extension of the property
boundaries; and

For all artificial waterways: associated with the canal estate lot in a
suitable location adjacent or close to those
• navigation safety requirements should
facilities(AS 3962 2001: Guidelines for
comply with the maritime safety regulations
Design of Marinas — provides guidance on
of the Department of Transport;
car parking requirements); and
• the artificial waterway system should
• when a large number of similar structures
contain clearly defined main waterways, and
is expected (eg. boat ramps and jetties), a
branches and cross-intersections should be
policy relating to such structures (including
avoided;
standard designs for structures) shall be
• junctions of artificial waterways should prepared by the developer, in consultation
provide clear sight distances; with and to the satisfaction of, both the local
government and the waterways manager.
• navigation beacon piles shall be placed
Consideration of implementing ISO 140001
to identify the presence of any hazard to
Environmental Management Systems is
navigation for the design vessel and shall
recommended.
be marked with day marks and lights
or reflective, coloured night marks in
accordance with Department of Transport For all artificial waterways:
requirements; • jetties, ramps and moorings may not be
• bridge clearances appropriate to the needs constructed except with a jetty license from
of the design vessel for height and width the Department of Transport, and approval
should be provided in accordance with of the waterways manager and the local
Department of Transport requirements; government where applicable;
• lighting in the area should not be a hazard • as waste disposal from vessels could
to safe navigation through excessive glare result in pollution of artificial waterways,
or inappropriate colour; and sewage pump-out facilities, refuse and
waste oil receptacles may be required by
• a sign shall be erected at the entrance(s)
the waterways manager for each project
to the artificial waterways advising that the
incorporating artificial waterways;
artificial waterway is designed for a vessel
of given maximum length and draught • to reduce pollution of artificial waterways,
(the design vessel dimensions), and that separate drainage systems fitted with
vessels of greater length and draught may pollutant traps may be required at boat
encounter navigation difficulties. ramps to limit runoff via the ramp;
• areas for activities with potential to
7.4 Moorings, jetties and pollute waterways (such as the draining of
launching ramps bilges) may be required to be constructed
adjacent to boat ramps and should include
appropriate drainage management systems.
In the Canal Zone:
Consideration should be given to installing
• all moorings, jetties and launching ramps
signage or other measures to discourage
must be contained within the mooring
boat users from undertaking bilge draining,
envelope, and no intrusion into the
wash down or other polluting activities on
navigation channel will be permitted;
ramps; and
• mooring envelopes, jetty envelopes and
• jetties and moorings shall not be attached
launching ramps should be identified on the
to retaining walls unless the retaining wall
structure plan;
has been designed for that purpose.
• car parking areas, to the satisfaction of the
local government, shall be provided for all
jetties, ramps, and moorings not directly
14 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 15
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
7.5 Property frontage to 7.6 Flood mitigation
waterways
For all artificial waterways:
Within the Canal Zone:
• impact of the proposed development
• individual property owners with a water (including proposed fences or barriers) on
frontage will be responsible for stability and flood flow should be evaluated, and in areas
integrity of that water frontage; where they detrimentally impact the flooding
regime, proposals should not be permitted;
• a safe pedestrian public right of carriageway
easement (Refer to Section 195/196 Land • flood flows from upstream catchments
Administration Act 1997) shall be provided should not discharge directly to
along the edge of the waterway and located proposed developments (eg. via natural
within lot titles, and no obstructions such as or constructed channels or through
fencing shall impede public and emergency constructed spillway structures) unless
access along the waterway. Emergency the watercourse is specifically designed to
access is preferably achieved via provision manage the flow of floodwaters through
of public open space and /or location of the proposed development. Mooring
roads. The provision of 8-metre wide public envelopes are generally not permitted within
access ways must be avoided and are not watercourses acting as flow paths during
supported, unless no other physical design major flows; and
solution is available;
• the proponent should consult with the
• all buildings or load bearing structures Department of Water regarding proposed or
should be set back at least six metres (or existing regional flood studies.
such other distance as set out in the local
planning scheme) from any waterway wall to
7.7 Soil stability
ensure no additional loads are placed on the
waterway wall and to accommodate sight
For all canals and artificial waterways:
lines from adjoining properties;
• the local government may require a
• where a boundary abuts a waterway, the
geotechnical report from an appropriately
setback requirements shall be measured
qualified consulting engineer to determine
from the outer or artificial waterway side at
whether any requirements apply to buildings
the top of the waterway wall;
prior to the issue of development approval
• where a lot adjoins a canal or artificial or a building license; and
waterway, the boundary of such lot
• soil batters to be armoured to protect
should not extend beyond any retaining
against a 1 in 100 Annual Exceedence
or revetment wall of the canal or artificial
Probability (1% AEP) event prior to the issue
waterway; and
of a building licence for a dwelling.
• in determining minimum lot frontages of
a property adjoining a canal or artificial
7.8 Cyclonic areas
waterway, including the further subdivision
of the property, desirable dimensions of
a jetty envelope should be considered. Developments in cyclonic areas shall be
The Department of Transport will provide designed for:
guidance in this regard; and for all artificial
• extreme wind loads (AS 1170.2 2002:
waterways, all buildings or load bearing
Structural design actions – wind actions) on
structures should be sufficiently set back
all marine structures;
from any waterway wall in order to ensure
• extreme water levels associated with
no additional loads are placed on the
cyclonic storm surge for all maritime
waterway wall.
structures; and

• soil batters in cyclonic locations; along clearly identified prior to the finalization of the
waterway frontage to property lots may local scheme amendment.
require armour for a 1 in 100 Annual
Exceedence Probability (1% AEP) event The proponent shall also clearly identify
prior to clearance of titles. any environmental impacts associated
with maintenance dredging prior to project
approval. This shall include changes to water
A cyclone contingency plan is required for
quality, risks to marine fauna and impacts on
each development for ongoing operation.
benthic habitats. The proponent shall also
Examples are available from the Department of
prepare a maintenance dredging monitoring
Transport. In cyclonic areas, the boat mooring
and management plan (Including cumulative
management plan is to include a cyclone
impact of repeated dredging) that includes
contingency plan.
environmental values to be protected,
environmental quality objectives, levels of
protection and environmental quality criteria
7.9 Coastal and estuarine or river
to be achieved and contingency management
impacts
strategies for ensuring these objectives are
met.
Natural supply of littoral sand is a resource
shared by all Western Australians. Interruption The waterways manager shall fund
and trapping of sand and/or macro algae/ maintenance dredging. This funding or source
seagrass wrack is discouraged. Any potential of revenue may include rating revenue via
for this needs to be modelled and quantified, general, special area or differential rating
and the artificial waterway or canal estate methods.
designed to minimise impacts on the longshore
movement of sand and seagrass wrack.
7.11 Water circulation
Should the artificial waterway canal estate
The canal design must have the following basic
change the natural supply of sand or trap
design principles:
macro algae seagrass wrack along the coast,
the waterways manager shall be responsible • consideration will only be given to designs
for funding and carrying out artificial sand with good circulation, and which maximise
by passing of the interrupted supply, tidal flushing, mixing by wind action and
managing any seagrass wrack accumulation vertical mixing (eg. ideally flushing within
and managing any associated amenity, three days);
environmental and public health impacts.
• the water body bathymetry should not
have holes or sills and shall be designed
Potential impacts on estuarine and river
so that the water body is shallower than
systems shall be examined and appropriate
the adjacent natural water body, generally
mitigation measures addressed by approved
increasing in depth towards the entrance;
monitoring and management plans.
• water depths shall be the minimum possible
for safe navigation, allowing for siltation;
and
7.10 Maintenance dredging
• design of canals shall minimise build up of
organic material.
Proponents shall minimise the need for
maintenance dredging in their designs,
Design shall allow for maintenance access.
particularly in the connecting channel. The
The proponent shall outline upfront the
volume, cost, nature of the maintenance
environmental quality management framework
dredging material and disposal options shall be
16 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 17
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
for operation of the canal estate, including • protection of additional areas to maintain
environmental values, environmental significant biodiversity values; and
quality objectives, levels of protection and
• information to assist assessment processes
environmental quality criteria to be met to
during early consultation and formal
maintain acceptable water and sediment
approval processes.
quality. These criteria are to be established in
consultation with: • canal developments should consider
public access to launching facilities for non
• the Environmental Protection Authority or
motorised recreation craft (kyaks etc) in the
the Office of the Environmental Protection
provision of waterside parklands.
Authority;
• the Department of Environment and
Public open space calculations normally
Conservation (Cockburn Sound
exclude major roads, schools, commercial
Management Council); and
and major drainage areas, and, in a canal
• Swan River Trust estate, the area of artificial waterways and the
foreshore reserve should also be excluded from
whichever is relevant.
the area of land used to determine the 10 per
cent public open space contribution.
A monitoring and management program
Consideration should be given to location of
developed to demonstrate that the project can
some public open space away from artificial
be managed to comply with these criteria prior
waterways, because casual or formal sporting
to approval of canal or marina developments.
activities and playgrounds for small children are
not normally compatible with waterside sites.
7.12 Public open space
Small multipurpose reserves (generally a
minimum of 1000m2) which can combine
Public open space should be provided in a recreational function with areas for
canal estates (and similar developments) management and maintenance of the
in accordance with the WAPC Liveable waterways can be included in the 10 per cent
Neighbourhoods policy and Policy No. DC contribution. It is not intended that these
2.3 Public Open Space in Residential Areas. reserves should contain features which attract
Waterwise design principles shall be applied large numbers of people, such as a public boat
to the design and management of public open launching ramp.
space.
The foreshore reserve shall ensure public
This requires the normal 10 per cent public access to the natural waterway unless
open space contribution for residential conservation requires otherwise. Access shall
subdivision and additional foreshore reserves not be confined to canal estate residents and
for land abutting any natural watercourse. shall be provided from the nearest public road
with adequate car parking facilities. A safe
The 10 per cent public open space contribution public access way shall be provided along
should provide: the edge of the waterway and located within
lot titles, and no obstructions such as fencing
• active and passive recreation areas;
shall impede public and emergency access
• the wider community with opportunity
along the waterway. Emergency access may
to take advantage of views and aspects
be achieved via public open space, location
created by the waterway;
of adjoining roads, or if absolutely necessary,
• suitable locations for emergency and 8-metre wide access ways.
maintenance access;

Pedestrian cycle access shall form a the project planning phase to establish an
continuous link within the canal estate and appropriate environmental quality management
shall link with existing or proposed paths on framework for the canal estate or artificial
adjoining land. The design of canals should not waterway and any adjacent natural waterway
interrupt or interfere with convenient pedestrian or water body. The main purpose for applying
and cycle links, and where this is unavoidable, this framework is to ensure that environmental
convenient alternative links or pedestrian quality in the artificial waterway is managed
bridges should be provided. such that environmental quality and ecological
integrity in the adjacent natural waterway, water
Recreation in foreshore reserves should be body or groundwater is not compromised.
passive and water-oriented. The reserve should
exist for the benefit of the natural waterway and The framework should be based on the
its users, rather than for land-based activities recommended approaches in National Water
which can be located elsewhere. Quality Management Strategy Report 4
Australian and New Zealand Guidelines for
The foreshore reserve should: Fresh and Marine Water Quality and State
Water Quality Management Strategy Report
• measure 30–150 metres in width or
6 Implementation Framework for Western
greater, having regard to environmental,
Australia for the Australian and New Zealand
topographical, access and flood control
Guidelines for Fresh and Marine Water Quality
considerations, purpose of reserve and
and Water Quality Monitoring and Reporting
coastal processes;
(Guidelines Nos. 4 and 7: National Water
• avoid development within a designated Quality Management Strategy).
floodway;
The basis of the environmental quality
• limit development within the flood fringe and
management framework is the environmental
plan for the effects of climate change; and
values, environmental quality objectives and
• be clearly delineated, by the proponent
levels of protection that should be defined
in consultation with local government,
for the canal estate or artificial waterway and
Department of Water, Department of
adjacent natural waterway or water body.
Environment and Conservation (Cockburn
These represent the community’s desires and
Sound Management Council), Swan
aspirations for the waterway and form the
River Trust and any other applicable
primary management aims. Advice can be
public authority, whichever is relevant, for
sought from:
subsequent vesting under Section 152 of
• the Department of Environment and
the Planning and Development Act 2005.
Conservation (Cockburn Sound
Management Council);
8. Guidelines for water quality
• Swan River Trust;
management
• the Department of Water;
8.1 Environmental quality
• Environmental Protection Authority or the
management framework
Office of the Environmental Protection
Authority; and
The Environmental Protection Authority or
• the Department of Health
the Office of the Environmental Protection
Authority, Department of Environment and on primary management aims, whichever is
Conservation (Cockburn Sound Management relevant. Environmental values that would
Council), Swan River Trust, Department of generally need to be protected include
Water and local government, whichever ‘ecosystem health’, ‘fishing’ (safe for
is relevant, should be consulted during consumption) and ‘recreation and aesthetics’.
18 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 19
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
The proponent should submit the final primary • toxic contaminants, particularly
management aims to the EPA for review and hydrocarbons and metals;
endorsement. The EPA has been tasked with
• toxic algae; and
the role of reviewing and endorsing primary
management aims through the State Water • other factors, such as salinity, acid sulphate
Quality Management Strategy (No.6).’ soil management or biota may be significant
in some instances.
To achieve primary management aims, a
suitable set of environmental quality criteria The set of water, sediment or biological
that represent an acceptable level of quality indicators measured for any particular canal
for the water, sediment and/or biota should be estate or artificial waterway will depend on
established for the most relevant indicators. the threatening activities and processes at
The indicators should then be the focus of an that location and the risks they pose to the
environmental monitoring program, and criteria waterway.
should become the benchmarks for measuring
environmental performance and triggering Water and sediment quality samples and
implementation of contingency management measurements shall be collected in accordance
plans if they are not met. with approved standard operating procedures
and relevant standards
For some indicators, it may be necessary to (eg. AS/NZS5667.1 1998: Water quality-
derive appropriate environmental quality criteria sampling-Guidance on the design of sampling
using data collected from a suitable reference programs, sampling techniques and the
site that represents the desirable level of quality preservation and handling of samples;
to be achieved in the canal estate or artificial AS/NZS 5667.4 1998: Water quality-sampling-
waterway. In these situations, a reference guidance from lakes, natural and man-made;
site water quality monitoring program shall
AS/NZS5667.9 1998: Water Quality-Sampling
be created prior to the assessment of the
Guidance on sampling from marine Waters; and
project and run for at least one year prior to
AS/NZS5667.12 1998: Water Quality-Sampling
development of works.
Guidance on sampling of Bottom Sediments).
8.1.1 Water and sediment quality
8.1.2 Establishing the quality of the
indicators
adjacent natural waterway, water
Indicators regarded as being significant for body or source groundwater
assessing water and sediment quality include
The Department of Water, Department of
but are not limited to:
Environment and Conservation (Cockburn
• suspended solids Sound Management Council), Swan River
Trust, Environmental Protection Authority or
• pH and total acidity
the Office of the Environmental Protection
• density stratification
Authority, the Department of Health and local
• dissolved oxygen government, whichever is relevant, must be
consulted during the project planning phase
• bacteriological counts
to establish whether the source water in the
• chlorophyll ‘a’ adjacent waterway, water body or groundwater
is of sufficient quality to be able to support a
• sulfidic and monosulfidic materials
canal estate or other artificial waterway.
• phytoplankton
• alkalinity This will require water quality assessment of
the proposal, accounting for both temporal
• nutrients
and spatial variation in water quality. Historical
• sediment organic carbon accumulation

water and sediment quality data may be reporting shall be to the satisfaction of the
available from the Department of Water’s WIN entities listed above and local government.
database or the Waterways manager of the
artificial waterway. Nevertheless, background Hydrodynamic and water quality modelling
water quality data should be collected prior to of the artificial waterway is required prior to
assessment of the project and should cover at construction. The modelling scope should be
least one full season or preferably one year. endorsed by:
• the Department of Environment and
Additional data may also be required if the
Conservation (Cockburn Sound
period sampled does not represent typical
Management Council);
conditions. A background water quality
monitoring program should therefore be • Swan River Trust;
developed prior to approval of the project. If
• the Department of Water;
both background and reference site monitoring
• Environmental Protection Authority or the
programs (see 8.1.1) are required, it may
Office of the Environmental Protection
be possible to combine them into a single
Authority; and
monitoring program.
• the Department of Health
If quality of the adjacent waterway is not
whichever is relevant.
appropriate, a canal estate proposal for that
location is probably inappropriate.
Hydrodynamic modelling shall account for
8.1.3 Compliance with environmental spatial and temporal variation in flushing
quality objectives for artificial (e-folding) times throughout the waterway.
waterways
Typical and worst-case scenarios shall be
modelled. Seasonal variations in key variables
The proponent shall demonstrate that the
such as winds, tides and groundwater inflows
environmental quality objectives established
should be considered and the associated
for the artificial waterway (both ecological and
meteorologic and oceanographic conditions for
social) will be met to the satisfaction of:
model runs should be included.
• the Department of Environment and
Conservation (Cockburn Sound Guidance on modelling should be sought from
Management Council); State agencies named in this section.
• Swan River Trust;
• the Department of Water;
8.1.4 Compliance with environmental
• Environmental Protection Authority or the
quality objectives for water and
Office of the Environmental Protection sediment quality in adjacent
Authority; natural waterway or water body
• the Department of Health; and
The proponent shall demonstrate that
• the Department of Fisheries environmental quality objectives (both
ecological and social) established for an
whichever is relevant.
adjacent natural waterway and water body will
be met to the satisfaction of:
Compliance with environmental quality • the Department of Environment and
objectives during construction and post- Conservation (Cockburn Sound
construction would be determined through Management Council);
results of the environmental monitoring
• Swan River Trust;
and management program. Monitoring and
20 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 21
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
• the Department of Water; • free from floating debris, oil, grease,
scum, foam and other floating materials
• Environmental Protection Authority or the
in amounts sufficient to be unsightly or
Office of the Environmental Protection
otherwise objectionable; and
Authority; and
• free from materials that will produce colour,
• the Department of Health
odour, turbidity, or other conditions to such
whichever is relevant. a degree as to be unsightly or otherwise
objectionable.
Prior to assessment of the canal development
8.1.6 Maintenance of artificial waterway
or artificial waterway, the proponent shall model
water quality by natural process
the zone of influence, zone of effect and zone
of loss in the natural waterway or water body Maintenance of artificial waterway water
that could potentially result from construction quality should be largely dependent on natural
of the artificial waterway development or processes, thus minimising the need for active
from the on-going operation of the waterway management. The monitoring and management
post-construction. Environmental Assessment program developed by the proponent is to
Guidelines (EAG) for the loss of benthic habitat include a reporting framework and contingency
(EAG No.3) and dredging (EAG No.7) can be management plan for managing the impacts
obtained from the Office of the Environmental of development should water quality criteria
Protection Authority. It is important that or standards for the waterway not be met.
construction and operation phases are The program should be developed before any
considered separately.Compliance with approval is issued to enable relevant agencies
environmental quality objectives established to review and endorse plans prior to approval.
for the natural waterway would be determined
through results of the environmental monitoring
8.1.7 Stormwater runoff and drainage
program conducted during the construction
and post-construction phases. Monitoring and Stormwater runoff or drainage to artificial
reporting shall be to the satisfaction of the waterways, particularly from vegetated or
entities listed above and local government. vehicle use areas, is a potential source of
nutrient or contaminant input to artificial
Compliance with environmental quality waterways and adjacent source waters.
objectives established for the natural waterway Developments must include appropriate
or water body would be determined through design features and management strategies to
results of the environmental monitoring minimise any inputs to an artificial waterway,
program conducted during the construction which may adversely affect water quality. The
and post-construction phases. Monitoring and Stormwater Management Manual for Western
reporting shall be to the satisfaction of the Australia and the WAPC’s Planning Bulletin
entities listed above and local government. No. 92 Urban Water Management provide
guidelines for the treatment of stormwater.
Stormwater management will need to be
addressed in water management documents
8.1.5 General aesthetic guidelines
produced in accordance with Better Urban
Proponents shall demonstrate how the Water Management (WAPC 2008).
development has been designed and how it will
be managed, to ensure that the waterway will
8.1.8 Industrial and residential waste
be:
No industrial or residential waste or effluent of
• free from materials that settle to form
any nature (including air conditioner bleed-off)
putrescent or otherwise objectionable
can be discharged directly or indirectly into
sludge deposits;
artificial waterways. A waste management

plan shall be developed to include measures 8.2 Artificial waterway flushing
to reduce waste, monitor waste, educate
users of appropriate waste disposal measures The proposal shall detail how the artificial
and provide corrective actions should waste waterway design has followed best practice
management measures prove ineffective. design principles, including the following
aspects:
8.1.9 Vessel sullage • the design shall maximise natural mixing so
that flushing is largely dependent on natural
There shall not be any discharge of boat
processes;
sullage to the artificial waterway or the natural
waterway. The developer shall outline how • the waterway should not rely on mechanical
vessel sullage will be managed for vessels means such as pumping to maintain water
using the waterways. The Department of quality.
Health and Water Corporation will need to
be consulted and satisfied in regard to the
Aspects that should be explored to maximise
adequacy of the pump out facilities and
water quality include, but should not be limited
connection to the utility service.
to:
• depths and layouts that maximise efficiency
of tidal mixing;
8.1.10 Impact on fauna and flora
• depths and layouts that minimise
The proponent should demonstrate that the occurrence of vertical stratification;
development will not impact the passage of
• depths and layouts that avoid the creation
fauna (including cetaceans, migratory bird
of poorly flushed pockets;
species and fish) in the natural waterway to the
satisfaction of: • use of dominant wind directions to promote
mixing;
• the Department of Environment and
Conservation (Cockburn Sound • where wind-mixing is important, ensuring
Management Council); that wind shadowing by future buildings
in the development will not compromise
• Swan River Trust;
performance; and
• Environmental Protection Authority or the
• design to minimise ingress of wrack and
Office of the Environmental Protection
algae from an adjacent water body.
Authority; and
• the Department of Fisheries
whichever is relevant.
Where risks to fauna are posed, the proponent
will need to demonstrate avoidance,
minimisation, mitigation and management
measures to the satisfaction of the entities
listed above. An assessment will need to be
undertaken in regard to the impacts upon major
benthic primary producers from dredging and
increased turbidity.
22 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 23
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Appendix 1
Summary of procedures for assessment of canal estates and artificial
waterway developments
Developer prepares concept plan
Preliminary consultation with local government and relevant State government agencies
Department of Planning, Environmental Protection Authority/Office of Environmental Protection
Authority, Department of Environment and Conservation (Cockburn Sound Management
Council), Swan River Trust, Department of Water, Department of Transport, Department of Health,
Department of Fisheries and to ascertain whether proposal is generally acceptable
Drafting of deed of agreement between developer,
local government and affected parties
Refer to EPA to Developer submits relevant documentation
consider need for to local government with request for local
formal environmental planning scheme amendment To WAPC if there
assessment* is a question as
to consistency
Local government considers proposed
Developer prepares with regional
amendment and, unless there is a question as
environmental review planning scheme
to consistency with regional planning scheme
and submits to EPA or State policy,
or State policy, decides whether to proceed
for consent to
advertise
EPA checks review
accords with Local government advertises
instructions amendment (with environmental review)
for public inspection and submission
EPA considers
submissions on Local government forwards environmental
environmental review, submissions and responses to the
prepares bulletin for Environmental Protection Authority
decision of Minister for
the Environment
Local government considers submissions and
outcome of environmental assessment, and
decides whether to proceed with amendment
Minister for the
Environment sets
conditions
WAPC considers submissions and makes
recommendation to Minister for Planning,
who decides whether to grant final approval
(with or without modifications)
Finalise and sign
deed of agreement
Local government affects any required modifications,
endorses amendment documents and returns to
Subdivision/
Minister for Planning for endorsement
development
applications dealt with
Minister for Planning endorses in accordance with
documents and Department of procedures in relevant
Planning arranges gazettal legislation.

Appendix 2 3.3 General provisions:
The following typical clauses may be used as
Canal zone in a local planning
appropriate, in addition to other more specific
scheme
provisions as may be required in each case:
1. General
‘Clause No. # Development in Canal Zones
Given the different construction of scheme
3.3.1 The local government’s intention in
texts and the variety of proposals falling
controlling development within the
within the definition of a canal estate, it is
Canal Zone is to:
clearly not possible to provide an exhaustive
• encourage a high standard of development
set of recommendations appropriate to all
within the zone;
schemes and proposals. It will therefore be
necessary to examine the relevance of each • promote and safeguard health, safety,
provision and customise any local planning convenience, environmental quality and the
scheme amendment to suit each scheme and general welfare and amenity of the locality;
circumstance. and
• promote a high standard of maintenance
2. Scheme amendment documents
of artificial waterways and other waterways
(through cooperation with the Waterway
Where an amendment involves a local planning
Manager and the Department of Transport).
scheme where there is no current reference
to a Canal Zone, there will be a need to 3.3.2 Land comprised of artificial waterways
initiate changes to the scheme in accordance in a canal estate developed within a
with the process set down in the Town Canal Zone is land for the purpose of
Planning Regulations 1967 and Planning and this Scheme and, notwithstanding any
Development Act 2005. other provision of this Scheme text,
any development in, on, under, over or
3. Scheme text provisions abutting any such waterways requires
the local government’s prior approval
3.1 Definitions: in accordance with the procedures set
out in this Scheme.
In most local planning schemes with no
current provisions for the Canal Zone, the list 3.3.3 Any development proposed between
of definitions and interpretations is likely to be the boundary of an artificial waterway
inadequate for adequate control. Desirably, and the setback distance for any
any scheme amendment should incorporate buildings on the land as prescribed
definitions set out in Appendix 4. by this and other provisions of this
Scheme, requires prior approval of
3.2 List of zones and zoning table: local government in consultation
within the Department of Transport in
Appropriate amendments to the scheme text
accordance with the procedures set
will need to be made to include the zone
out in this Scheme.
classification – ‘Canal Zone’.
3.3.4 Where development as described
in clauses 3.3.2 and 3.3.3 above
Where zoning is amended to include Canal
is proposed on land, the local
Zone, appropriate symbols will need to show
government shall require the developer
whether particular land uses are permitted
to provide certification by a consulting
within the zone, together with those uses
engineer that the development is safe
which may be permitted at local government
under all conditions. Local government
discretion.
24 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 25
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
shall take into account any comments 3.3.11 No fence situated more than 7.5
in making its determination. metres from an artificial waterway
frontage shall exceed 2 metres above
3.3.5 All artificial waterway retaining walls
the original stabilised surface.
along an artificial waterway frontage
shall be kept in a structurally sound 3.3.12 General provisions may be varied
condition and shall not be altered, where the local government adopts
extended or removed without prior design guidelines for the alternative
written approval of local government. urban form within the canal estate.
The owner or vested manager of
land adjoining the artificial waterway
shall be responsible for stability of
the interface between water of the
artificial waterway and that land,
and shall maintain this interface to
the satisfaction of local government.
Alternate management arrangements
may be considered where applicable
legislation exists, for example the
Swan and Canning Rivers Management
Act 2006.
3.3.6 All dwellings shall be set back a
minimum of 6 metres from an artificial
waterway frontage measured from the
outer side of the top of the waterway
wall and 6 metres from a road frontage.
3.3.7 No retaining wall or fencing shall be
erected along the artificial waterway
frontage or within 1 metre of the top of
an artificial waterway wall or artificial
waterway frontage whichever is the
greater setback as determined by the
local government.
3.3.8 No retaining wall situated greater
than 1 metre in height but less than
7.5 metres from an artificial waterway
frontage shall exceed 1 metre above
the stabilised surface level.
3.3.9 No retaining wall situated more that
7.5 metres but less than 9 metres from
an artificial waterway frontage shall
exceed 1.5 metres above the stabilised
surface level,
3.3.10 No fence situated within 7.5 metres
of an artificial waterway frontage shall
exceed 1 metre above the original
stabilised surface.

Appendix 3
Agency/proponent responsibilities and relevant legislation for canal estates
and artificial waterway developments.
Western Australian Planning Commission (WAPC)/Department of Planning
www.planning.wa.gov.au
Agency branch Current role/responsibility in canal management
Regional Planning and
Strategy Division
• Perth and Peel ➝ Statutory referrals, structure plans, scheme amendments,
Planning and Strategy development and subdivision applications.
Division
• Strategy Policy and ➝ Policy coordination and development.
Projects Division
➝ Strategic projects.
Legislation
• Planning and Development Act 2005 provides a system for land use planning and
development in the State and for related purposes:
– direct relevance to canal estates
– outlines the processes of approval, etc.
• Town Planning Regulations 1967:
– Scheme amendment procedures
– model scheme text provisions.
Policies
• Draft Coastal Zone Management Policy for Western Australia (2001):
– the State policy aimed to achieve a balance between the conservation and development of
the Western Australian coast.
• State Planning Policy (SPP) No. 1 – State Planning Framework Policy (Variation 2):
– A central framework which provides a context for decision-making on land use and
development in Western Australia, taking into account issues associated with the
environment, community, economy and infrastructure.
• SPP 2.0 – Environment and Natural Resources Policy 2000:
– defines the principles and considerations that represent good and responsible planning;
– in terms of environment and natural resource issues within the framework of the State
Planning Strategy.
• SPP 2.6 – State Coastal Planning Policy (Amended 2006):
– deals with issues relating to public interest, coastal foreshore reserve (and appropriate
setbacks), coastal strategies and management plans, environment, development and
settlement.
• SPP 2.8 – Bushland Policy for the Perth Metropolitan Region:
– This policy applies if the canal development is proposed on Bush Forever areas.
26 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 27
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Western Australian Planning Commission (WAPC)/Department of Planning
• SPP 2.9 – Water Resources Policy:
– directly related to policy SPP2 and provides clarification and additional guidance to
planning decision-makers for consideration of water resources in land use planning;
– this policy is important when canal development is proposed on land containing wetlands,
waterways or estuaries;
– objectives of the policy are to:
1. protect, conserve and enhance water resources identified as having significant
economic, social, cultural and/or environmental values;
2. assist in ensuring the availability of suitable water resources to maintain essential
requirements for human and all other biological life with attention to maintaining or
improving the quality and quantity of water resources; and
3. promote and assist in the management and sustainable use of water resources.
• SPP 3.4 Natural Hazards and Disasters (2006):
– this policy applies to the planning and development of land that may be affected by natural
disasters and hazards (such as floods, cyclones, storm surge, severe storms, landslide,
bush fires and earthquakes). SPP. 3.6 Development Contributions for Infrastructure:
• SPP 3.6 – Development Contributions for Infrastructure
– This policy sets out the principles and considerations that apply to development
contributions for the provision of infrastructure in new and established urban areas.
• Development Control (DC) Policy No. 2.2 – Residential subdivision.
• Development Control (DC) Policy No. 2.3 – Public open space in residential areas.
• Development Control (DC) Policy No. 6.1 – Country Coastal Planning Policy (1989):
– this policy is designed to provide uniform approach to land use planning, development and
subdivision of coastal areas of the State outside the Perth metropolitan region. The policy
is intended to assist local government, developers and planning consultants and to deal
primarily with new development and subdivision.
• Liveable Neighbourhoods (October 2007):
– an operational policy to be followed in the design and approval of urban development. It
applies to structure planning and subdivision for greenfield sites and for redevelopment of
large brownfield and urban infill sites.
Bulletins
• Planning Bulletin 64 – Acid Sulfate Soils (2009):
– supersedes Planning Bulletin 64 Acid Sulfate Soils (November 2003);
– outlines the range of matters which need to be addressed at various stages of the planning
process to ensure that subdivision and development of land containing acid sulphate
soils is planned and managed to avoid potential adverse impacts on the natural and built
environment.
• Planning Bulletin 92 – Urban Water Management (2009):
– provides guidance on urban water management matters to be taken into account by
the WAPC, local governments and applicants in considering planning proposals and
applications for new development such as residential, rural-residential and commercial;
– ensures planning decision-making, where water issues are a consideration, is informed via
relevant and appropriate information;
– supersedes Planning Bulletin 61.

Western Australian Planning Commission (WAPC)/Department of Planning
Strategies
• State Water Quality Management Strategy for Western Australia (2001):
– State framework for implementation of the National Water Quality Management Strategy
(1994);
– prime objective of the national strategy is ‘‘to achieve sustainable use of the nation’s water
resources by protecting and enhancing their quality while maintaining economic and social
development.’’
• Busselton Wetlands Conservation Strategy:
– provides a framework to guide sustainable land use and wise management of the
biodiversity and environmental values of the Busselton wetlands area;
– applies if development is proposed in the Busselton wetlands area.
• Coastal and Lakeland’s Planning Strategy Dawesville – Binningup:
– provides a detailed resource information base and policy guidelines to assist in
management of pressures for development and changes in land use activities within
catchments to the Yalgorup Lakes and along the coastal strip;
– applies if development proposed within the catchments to the Yalgorup Lakes and along
the coastal strip.
• Visual Landscape Planning in Western Australia – A manual for evaluation, assessment, siting
and design (2008):
– applies when deciding on a suitable site for a canal development;
– developed to help public and private sector planners address visual landscape in the
planning process;
– explains fundamental planning tools of visual landscape evaluation and visual impact
assessment;
– provides guidelines for siting and design in relation to a range of landscape types and land
uses.
28 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 29
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Department of Transport
www.transport.wa.gov.au
Agency branch Current role/responsibility in canal management
Coastal Infrastructure ➝ Facility design and development.
➝ Assessment and clearance of marina and canal proposals.
➝ Breakwater construction, dredging, moorings, jetties,
boat harbours, boat ramps – planning and maintenance
➝ Licensing of maritime structures (jetties).
Marine Safety ➝ Moorings, navigation, placement and repair of navigational aids.
➝ Emergency contact for incident and complaint.
Legislation
• Jetties Act 1926
• Marine and Harbours Act 1981
• WA Marine Act 1982.
Standards
AS 4997 2005: Guidelines for the Design of Maritime Structures, Standards Australia;
AS 3962 2001: Guidelines for Design of Marinas, Standards Australia;
AS 1170.2 2002: Structural design actions-wind actions, Standards Australia;
AS 4678 2002: Earth-retaining structures, Standards Australia;
Strategic Plan for Maritime Facilities, Department of Transport, 1996.

Department of Environment and Conservation
www.dec.wa.gov.au
Agency branch Current role/responsibility in canal management
• Department of The Department may provide advice to government agencies and
Environment and proponents in relation to its key functions. Matters on which it may
Conservation Regions
provide advice include:
are generally the
• acid sulfate soil and contaminated sites;
first point of contact
for initial advice in
• biodiversity conservation;
relation to biodiversity
conservation, • Department-managed areas and facilities;
Department-
• emissions and impacts on Department’s environmental regulation
managed areas
and environmental function;
regulation pursuant to
• climate change.
Part V Environmental
Protection Act 1986. Its roles include the regulation of:
• The management • clearing of native vegetation;
of lands and
• taking of native flora and fauna;
waters under the
Conservation and • prescribed premises;
Land Management Act
1984. • pollution and environmental harm;
• Contaminated Sites • contaminated sites.
Branch for site
contamination and
acid sulfate soil.
• Native Vegetation
Conservation Branch
for clearing permits.
• Climate Change Unit
Legislation
• Conservation and Land Management Act 1984:
– applies to land or waters comprising national parks, conservation parks, nature reserves,
marine nature reserves, marine parks and marine management areas;
– does not apply to land defined as ‘excluded waters’ (includes State coastal waters).
• Environmental Protection Act 1986:
– regulates pollution and environmental harm;
– regulates clearing of native vegetation.
(Where native vegetation on-site is proposed to be cleared, it will be necessary to obtain
a vegetation clearing permit, unless the clearing is exempt under Schedule 6 of the
Environmental Protection Act 1986 or exempt under the Environmental Protection (clearing of
Native Vegetation) Regulations 2004).
• Wildlife Conservation Act 1950:
– regulates the taking of native flora and fauna.
• Contaminated Sites Act 2003:
– regulates contaminated sites.
30 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 31
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Department of Environment and Conservation
Policies
Conservation Commission of Western Australia Policy Statement 1 July 2006 Mosquito Control:
• Wetlands Conservation Policy For Western Australia (Government of Western Australia 1997):
– applies to wetlands covered by the Ramsar definition;
– aims to protect Western Australian wetlands – preventing further loss or degradation;
– established a Wetlands Coordinating Committee.
• Conservation of Endangered and Specially Protected Fauna in the Wild – CALM Policy
Statement 33:
– policy applies if the canal estate was proposed to be located in an area that is known to be
home to endangered or specially protected fauna.
• Conservation of Threatened Flora in the Wild – CALM Policy Statement 9:
– as above – ie. policy only applies if the canal estate was proposed to be located in an area
known to contain threatened flora.
• Guidelines Checklist for Preparing a wetland Management Plan (Dec 2008):
– used by developers and their consultants when required to prepare a wetland management
plan to the satisfaction of Department of Environment and Conservation as a condition of
development approval, subdivision or scheme amendment approvals.
• Protecting our Wetlands in Western Australia 2007:
– outlines importance of wetlands, existing protection mechanisms for wetlands in Western
Australia and Department of Environment and Conservation incentive programs to help
manage and protect wetlands.
• Mooring Policy 59:
– applies if the proposed canal estate includes proposed moorings in marine conservation
reserves;
– the has been developed to:
– maintain ecological and social values of marine conservation reserves by minimising
impacts of uncontrolled mooring and anchoring activities;
– enhance user safety, access and equity in relation to moorings in marine conservation
reserves, and
– provide a framework to accommodate present and future mooring usage patterns in
marine conservation reserves.
• Setting Priorities for Conservation of WA’s Threatened Flora and Fauna – CALM Policy
Statement 50.
• Acid Sulfate Soil Guidelines:
– Treatment and management of soils and water in acid sulfate soil landscapes (July 2011);
– identification and investigation of acid sulfate soils and acidic landscapes (May 2009); and
– direct relevance to canal estates.

Department of Environment and Conservation
(Cockburn Sound Management Council)
http://csmc.environment.wa.gov.au
Agency branch Current role/responsibility in canal management
Cockburn Sound Assessment and advice to Minister for Environment and
Management Council Environmental Protection Authority for marina and canal proposals.
Breakwater construction, dredging within State Environmental
(Cockburn Sound) Policy 2005 boundary areas.
Cockburn Sound Management Council may provide advice to
government agencies and proponents in relation to its key functions.
Matters on which it may provide advice include:
• water quality and seagrass health;
• monitoring and management of pollution and environmental harm;
• contaminants in water and sediments;
• Council-managed areas;
• biodiversity conservation;
• emissions and impacts on Council’s environmental management
function;
• acid sulfate soil and contaminated sites;
• climate change.
Assessment and advice to Minister for Environment and
Environmental Protection Authority for marina and canal proposals.
Breakwater construction, dredging within State Environmental
(Cockburn Sound) Policy 2005 boundary areas.
Cockburn Sound Management Council may provide advice to
government agencies and proponents in relation to its key functions.
Matters on which it may provide advice include:
• water quality and seagrass health;
• monitoring and management of pollution and environmental harm;
• contaminants in water and sediments;
• Council-managed areas;
• biodiversity conservation;
• emissions and impacts on Council’s environmental management
function;
• acid sulfate soil and contaminated sites;
• climate change.
32 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 33
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Department of Environment and Conservation
(Cockburn Sound Management Council)
Standards
Public authorities with management responsibilities in the State Environmental Policy area will,
within their area of jurisdiction –
1. make decisions and actions consistent with the objectives of the policy;
2. develop best management practices for the control of drainage, sewage, ballast water and
disposal of wastewater and discharge of wastes and nutrients, whether point or diffuse
source, and directly or indirectly discharged into the policy area;
3. incorporate into their work programs means of achieving the environmental quality
objectives outlined in clause 7 of the policy, for activities which include but are not limited
to diffuse sources of emissions and to licensed premises discharging wastes or nutrients,
directly or indirectly, into the policy area;
4. establish monitoring programs and inventories as appropriate, using the Manual of
Standard Operating Procedures for Environmental Monitoring against the Cockburn Sound
Environmental Quality Criteria (2003–2004), Environmental Protection Authority 2005 (as
amended and published from time to time by the Environmental Protection Authority
following public consultation); and
5. report the results annually of monitoring programs to the Cockburn Sound Management
Council.
Policies
• State Environmental (Cockburn Sound) Policy 2005:
1. establishes the basis on which Cockburn Sound and the environment of adjacent land is to
be protected;
2. purposes of this policy are –
i. to declare, protect and maintain the environmental values of Cockburn Sound;
ii. to abate pollutants and restrict activities that diminish environmental values of Cockburn
Sound;
iii. to establish a program to protect and enhance environmental quality to support
environmental values of Cockburn Sound;
iv. to give effect to environmental quality objectives and environmental quality criteria for
Cockburn Sound; and
v. to give effect to the Environmental Management Plan for Cockburn Sound;
vi. report to Minister for Environment and Parliament annually on the implementation of the
State Environmental Policy and the State of Environment of Cockburn Sound and its
surrounds.

Swan River Trust
www.swanrivertrust.wa.gov.au
Agency branch Current role/responsibility in canal management
‘The Trust has overall planning, protection and management
responsibility for the Swan and Canning River system. The Trust
provides advice, makes recommendations to and comes under the
jurisdiction of the Minister for Environment. In accordance with the
Swan and Canning Rivers Management Act 2006, the Trust is the
‘owner’ of the river reserve on behalf of the Crown, and therefore
would need to agree to an application being made within the river
reserve.
Proposals located within or abutting the Trust Development Control
Area Boundary or proposals likely to affect the waters within the Trust
Development control Area Boundary shall be referred to the Trust at
preliminary consultation and formal approval stage. Proposals for
canal estate or artificial waterway development wholly within the Trust
Development Control Area will require Trust approval under Part 5 of
the Swan and Canning Rivers Management Act 2006’.
The Trust to provide planning and technical advice to local
government, WAPC/Department of Planning on issues such as risk of
pollution, erosion, and any other issue affecting the development and
health of the Swan or Canning River system including its tributaries.
This advice is incorporated into the approval process to determine
whether a development application is required and whether it be
approved with appropriate conditions or not.
Legislation
• Swan and Canning Rivers Management Act 2006:
– Applies to development proposed in/adjoining Swan or Canning Rivers.
– Objectives of this Act are to:
1. provide for restoration and protection of the development control area and the River
park;
2. provide for management of activities that affect ecological and community benefits and
amenity of the development control area and the River park;
3. provide for the needs of future generations in relation to ecological and community
benefits and amenity of the development control area and the River park;
4. recognise interests of the Noongar community and other people in the community with
an association with the development control area or the River park and to provide for
their participation in management of those areas and management of activities affecting
the ecological and community benefits and amenity of those areas;
5. promote and facilitate good management of the catchment area to meet objectives
referred to in paragraphs (a) to (d).
– Swan and Canning Rivers (Consequential and Transitional Provisions) Act 2006
– Swan and Canning Rivers Management Regulations 2007
– Swan and Canning Rivers (Transitional) Regulations 2007.
Strategy
River Protection Strategy for the Swan and Canning Rivers
34 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 35
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Swan River Trust
Policy
• SPP 2.10 – Swan and Canning River System:
– relevant to development proposed within, abutting or affecting waters in the Swan Canning
River system.
The following policies are available on the Trust’s website under ‘Planning and Licensing’.
SRT/EA – Conservation, environmental and landscape protection
SRT/DE1 – Dredging
SRT/DE15 – Yacht Clubs / Marinas
SRT DE7 – River Retaining Walls
SRT/D3 – Development Setback Requirements
SRT/E5 – Heritage
SRT/EA2 – Foreshore reserves
SRT/DE24 – Slipping facilities
SRT/D21 – Jetty Structures
SRT D2 – Access Pathway and Cycle Access
SRT DE9 – Commercial Development – General
SRT/DE6 – Dewatering.
Guidelines
Healthy Rivers Action Plan 2008
Legislation
• Environmental Protection Act 1986 (Parts 2,3 & 4):
– section 25;
– reporting of pollution and environmental harm;
– reporting of the clearing of native vegetation;
– advise Minister for Environment and Environmental Protection Authority;
– report on and implement environmental policies;
– assess, report and advise on environmental impact assessments.

Department of Water
www.water.wa.gov.au
Current role/responsibility in canal management
Department of Water:
• has statutory responsibility for maritime proposals in declared waterway (eg. Albany Harbour
and Vasse);
• is responsible for issuing approval and licences in declared waterways;
• is responsible for issuing licences to extract ground and surface water and permits to interfere
with bed and banks under the Rights in Water and Irrigation Act 1914;
• provides floodplain management advice and recommends guidelines for development on
floodplains with the object of minimising flood risk and damage;
• provides technical advice to local government, proponents, and Department of Planning to
incorporate into the approval process.
Legislation
• Waterways Conservation Act 1976:
– provision for conservation and management of certain waters and the associated land and
environment, to repeal the Swan River Conservation Act 1958, and for incidental and other
purposes (Refer Part 2, Section 10);
Part 2 (Section 10) of the Act specifically mentions artificial canal systems.
• Land Drainage Act 1925:
– provides for drainage of land, use of drains and drainage water and constitution of
drainage districts and other relative purposes.
• Water Agencies (Powers) Act 1984:
– to give the Minister functions and powers, and the Water Corporation powers to make
other provisions in respect of their functions, to establish the Water Resources Ministerial
Body and the Water Resources Council, and for related and other purposes.
• Rights in Water and Irrigation Act 1914:
– relates to rights in water resources, to make provision for regulation, management, use and
protection of water resources, to provide for irrigation schemes and for related purposes.
This Act only applies to proclaimed surface and groundwater areas.
Standards
• AS/NZS 5667.1 1998: Water quality – Sampling – Guidance on the design of sampling
programs, sampling techniques and the preservation and handling of samples, Standards
Australia.
• AS/NZS 5667.4 1998: Water quality – Sampling – guidance on sampling from lakes, natural
and man-made, Standards Australia.
• AS/NZS 5667.6 1998: Water quality – Sampling – Guidance on sampling of rivers and streams,
Standards Australia.
36 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 37
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Department of Water
Policies
‘Documents
1. Stormwater management manual for Western Australia (Department of Water 2004-2007)
Provides consistent advice on storm water management options for both new developments
and redevelopments in various built environments across Western Australia.
2. Foreshore policy No.1:identifying the foreshore area (Water and Rivers Commission,2002)
This policy position forms the basis by which all future foreshore and riparian land
management policy is developed.
3. Wetland,waterway and estuary agreement, Department of Water)
Clarifies agency roles, responsibilities and interactions regarding the provision of advice on
planning and development referrals for various wetland, estuary, waterway, floodplain and
catchment management issues.
4. Water quality protection guidelines (Department of Water)
These guidelines are prepared cooperatively with other government agencies, industry
and community groups. They discuss water quality issues and promote the use of best
environmental practice while taking into account environmental, social and economic
considerations
5. Better Urban Water Management
Provides a framework for appropriately considering water resources at each stage of the state
planning process.
6. Water Facts 14 Floodplain management (Water and Rivers Commission,2000)
No text.
7. River Restoration manual (Department of Water)
A series of guidelines on the nature, rehabilitation and long-term management of waterways in
Western Australia.
8. Fact Sheet: Supplementary information for permit applications to interfere with bed or banks
of watercourses (Department of Water).
No text.
9. Operational policy 5.08-Use of operating strategies in the water licensing process (Department
of Water, June 2011)
No text.
10. Water quality Protection Notes (Department of Water)
– Wetland Buffers (2000)
– Wetlands as Water bird Habitats (2000)
– Herbicide Use in Wetlands (2001)
These notes guide land use activities that may affect the quality of water resources.

Environmental Protection Authority, Office of the Environmental Protection
Authority
www.epa.wa.gov.au
Current role/responsibility in canal management
Decision-making authorities for canal estates and artificial waterways have an obligation under
Section 38 of the Environmental Protection Act 1986 to refer proposals to the Environmental
Protection Authority where they are likely, if implemented, to have a significant effect on the
environment. Decision-making authorities include agencies such as the Department of Water,
Department of Transport and the WAPC.
The Planning and Development Act and the Environmental Protection Act requires that all
planning schemes (including scheme amendments) be:
• referred by the responsible authority to the Authority for a decision on whether or not the
scheme and amendments should be formally assessed. This would include any schemes
which contemplate a canal estate or artificial waterway as a future land use. Allowing
environmental issues to be considered ‘upfront’ during the scheme formulation process
ensures that environmental factors are given proper consideration by the Authority and the
responsible authority before subdivision and development occur.
Should the Authority decide to assess a proposal or scheme there is opportunity for relevant
decision-making authorities and other government agencies such as Department of Environment
and Conservation and Department of Water to provide advice to the Authority during the
assessment process on the environmental issues. This would occur during the Authority’s
consideration of the proponent’s environmental scoping document and the advertising of the
proponent’s environmental review document (eg. Public Environmental Review or Environmental
Review and Management Program).
The above information will be made available as part of the Authority’s advice to the Minister
for Environment on whether the proposal or scheme should proceed and, if so, under what
conditions. Government will make the final decision as to whether a proposal or scheme should
proceed and under what conditions. The State Water Quality Management Strategy (No.6), which
was endorsed by Cabinet in 2004, also tasks the EPA with the role of reviewing and endorsing the
primary management objectives (environmental values, environmental quality objectives, levels
of ecological protection and environmental quality criteria) proposed for waters under the State’s
jurisdiction and which provide a framework for protecting and maintaining the quality of the
State’s marine and fresh waters.
Legislation
• Environmental Protection Act 1986:
– direct relevance;
– provides for prevention, control and abatement of pollution and environmental harm, for
conservation, preservation, protection, enhancement and management of the environment
and for matters incidental to or connected with the foregoing;
– Part IV establishes provisions for the Environmental Protection Authority to carry out
environmental impact assessment in Western Australia.
Policies
• Environmental Protection Peel Inlet – Harvey Estuary Policy (1992):
– sets out environmental quality objectives for the Estuary, which if achieved, will rehabilitate
the Estuary and protect the Estuary from further degradation; and
– outlines the means by which the environmental quality objectives for the Estuary are to be
achieved and maintained.
38 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 39
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Environmental Protection Authority, Office of the Environmental Protection
Authority
• Perth’s Coastal Waters Environmental Values and Objectives (February 2000):
– developed by the Environmental Protection Authority as an environmental management
framework aimed at protecting the coastal waters of Western Australia from effects of
pollution;
– framework is being applied to Perth’s coastal waters in consultation with the community
and stakeholders;
– a three-month public involvement and consultation program has been undertaken to help
the Authority identify environmental values of these waters, develop a set of environmental
quality objectives (ie. management goals) to protect environmental values, and provide an
indication of where the objectives should apply within Perth’s coastal waters.
• Environmental Protection (Swan Coastal Plain Lakes) Policy 1992.
Guidance Statements
• Guidance Statement No. 33:
– resource for local government, State Government agencies, consultants, proponents and
the public;
– mainly describes processes the Environmental Protection Authority may apply for under
the Environmental Protection Act 1986 to land use planning and development in Western
Australia, in particular the environmental impact assessment process applied to schemes;
and to provide information and advice on a range of environmental issues and their
protection and management.
• Guidance Statement No 40 – Management of Mosquitoes by Land Developers (June 2000)
– provides information which the Environmental Protection Authority will consider when
assessing proposals where mosquito management is a relevant environmental factor in
assessment;
– mosquitoes are important factor in canal estate development;
– takes into account the factor of mosquitoes, where mosquitoes present a health risk
or severe nuisance to residents, and protection of the environment as defined by the
Environmental Protection Act 1986 (WA) with a focus on minimising environmental impacts
associated with methods for mosquito management.
• Environmental Assessment Guideline No. 3 – Protection of Benthic Primary Producer Habitat
in Western Australia’s Marine Environment (December 2009):
– recognises the fundamental importance of benthic primary producer habitats to the
integrity of marine ecological communities;
– defines benthic primary producer habitats as seabed communities within which algae,
seagrass, mangroves, corals or mixtures of these groups are prominent components;
– establishes the framework that the Environmental Protection Authority will use for
considering the consequences of removing areas of benthic primary producer habitat.
• Environmental Assessment Guideline No. 7 – Marine Dredging Proposals – Draft, (December
2010):
– guides proponents to improve clarity, consistency and certainty with respect to
environmental impact assessment and management of marine dredging proposals.
Strategies
• State Water Quality Management Strategy No.6
– Sets out the process and responsibilities for implementation of National Water Quality
Management Strategy Guidelines No.’s 4 and 7 to State waters.

Department of Health
www.public.health.wa.gov.au
Current role/responsibility in canal management
The Department of Health is involved with:
• mosquito-control;
• water quality;
• environmental health;
• disease control and management.
Legislation
• Health Act 1911.
Documents:
• National Health and Medical Research (NHMRC) Guidelines for Managing Risk in Recreational
Waters (2006).
• Chironomid Midge and Mosquito Risk Assessment Guide for Constructed Water Bodies
(2007).
Policies:
• Wastewater Overflow Response Procedures, Draft Department of Health, Nov 2010.
• Harmful Algal Bloom Response Plan for Recreational Waters, Draft Department of Health Nov
2009.
Department of Fisheries
www.fish.wa.gov.au
Current role/responsibility in canal management
The Department of Fisheries is involved with:
• water quality and the effect on the health of aquatic animals;
• fish diseases and human health;
• marine biotoxins, algae and human health; and
• marine pests.
Legislation
• Fish Resources Management Act 1994.
• Fish Resources Management Regulations 1995.
• Fisheries Act 1905.
40 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 41
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Local government authorities (various)
Agency branch Current role/responsibility in canal management
• Town Planning Local governments are involved with:
• Environmental Health
• assessment of scheme amendments, subdivision and
Services Branches
development proposals;
• Engineering.
• formulation of local laws and vessel mooring management plan
and cyclone contingency plan;
• post-canal construction management/defects liability period;
• provision of community facilities and infrastructure;
• dredging and maintenance of waterway depth;
• maintenance of breakwaters;
• monitoring and management of water quality;
• collection and removal of weed or waste;
• repair and replacement of pumps and equipment required for
water exchange and flushing;
• water quality monitoring for microbes (ie. bacteria, viruses,
protozoa, etc.) and chemical monitoring (ie. nutrients, heavy
metals, etc.);
• environmental pollution control;
• mosquito control;
• foreshore management; and
• environmental audits.
Legislation
• Local Government Act 1995:
– outlines responsibilities of local government authorities.
• Town Planning Schemes.
Policy
• Relevant local government policies.

Federal legislation
Current role/responsibility in canal management
Environment assessment and approval process:
• a person must not take an action that has, will have or is likely to have a significant impact
on any of the matters of environmental significance without approval from the Australian
Government Minister for Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities;
• an action is a project, a development, an undertaking, an activity or a series of activities, or an
alteration of any of these things;
• decide if a proposed action needs to be referred:
– is the proposed action likely to have a significant impact on a matter of national
environmental significance?
– is the proposed action likely to have a significant impact on the environment in general (for
actions by Commonwealth agencies or actions on Commonwealth land) or the environment
on Commonwealth land (for actions outside Commonwealth land)?
• If No, approval is not required from the Minister.
• If Yes, person proposing to take the action makes a referral to the Minister.
Legislation
• Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999:
– the Australian Government’s central piece of environmental legislation;
– provides a legal framework to protect and manage nationally and internationally important
flora, fauna, ecological communities and heritage places – defined in the Act as ‘matters of
national environmental significance’.
Objectives of the Act are to:
– provide for protection of the environment, especially matters of national environmental
significance;
– conserve Australian biodiversity;
– provide a streamlined national environmental assessment and approvals process;
– enhance protection and management of important natural and cultural places;
– control international movement of plants and animals (wildlife), wildlife specimens and
products made or derived from wildlife;
– promote ecologically sustainable development through conservation and ecologically
sustainable use of natural resources.
Actions that have, or are likely to have, significant impact on a matter of national environmental
significance require approval from the federal Minister for the Environment, Heritage and the
Arts. The Minister will decide whether assessment and approval is required under the Act.
There are seven matters of national environmental significance that are protected under the
Act:
1. World Heritage properties;
2. National Heritage sites;
3. wetlands of international importance;
4. listed threatened species and ecological communities;
5. migratory species protected under international agreements;
6. Commonwealth marine areas; and
7. nuclear actions (including uranium mines).
42 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 43
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Federal legislation
Other matters protected:
– the environment, where actions proposed is on, or will affect, Commonwealth land and the
environment;
– the environment, where Commonwealth agencies are proposing to take an action;
– actions include projects, developments, activities, or alteration of these things;
– the Australian and New Zealand Environment Conservation Council provides national
guidelines for water quality standards.
Other legislation
Relevant legislation/policy and documents
Civil works includes: a road, railway, tramway, aircraft runway, canal, waterway, harbour, port or
marina.
• Public Works Act 1902:
– ‘Public work and work’ includes canals (Part I).
Australian Standards
Relevant legislation/policy and documents
• AS 3962 2001: Guidelines for design of marinas, Standards Australia:
– Guides design of marinas in Australia. Sets guidelines for use by designers, manufacturers
and operators of marinas for recreational and commercial vessels up to 50 metres in length
– including fixed berth and floating pontoon marina systems, single pontoons and floating
wave attenuators. Guidance is also given for on-shore facilities such as dry boat storage,
boatlifts, boat ramps and parking facilities.
• AS 4997 2005: Guidelines for the design of maritime structures, Standards Australia;
• AS 1170.2 2002: Structural design actions – wind actions, Standards Australia;
• AS 4678 2002: Earth-retaining structures, Standards Australia;
• AS/NZS 5667.1 1998: Water quality – Sampling – Guidance on the design of sampling
programs, sampling techniques and the preservation and handling of samples, Standards
Australia;
• AS/NZS 5667.4 1998: Water quality – Sampling – Guidance on sampling from lakes, natural
and man-made, Standards Australia;
• AS/NZS 5667.6 1998: Water quality – Sampling – Guidance on sampling from lakes, natural
and man-made, Standards Australia.

Proponents
Agency branch Current role/responsibility in canal management
All applicable agencies as Proponents:
required
• liaise with government agency and satisfy upfront project
information requirements (eg. climate change and coastal process
assessment);
• 5-year maintenance period with potential for annual extension;
• defects liability period negotiable with local government and
agencies as applicable; and
• develop to Australian Standards.
Relevant legislation/policy and documents
• Refer to Appendix 3.
44 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012

Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012 45
stnempoleveD
yawretaW
laicfiitrA
dna
setatsE
lanaC
8.1
yciloP
CD
Appendix 4 Chart Datum means a permanently
established surface from which soundings
Definitions or tide heights are established, and are the
theoretical level of water in any tidal area
during the lowest possible astronomical tide as
Artificial Waterway means any artificial
defined in the Australian National Tide Tables.
channel, lake, harbour or embayment for use
or intended for use by vessels for navigation
purposes and which may also be used for Connecting Channel means any channel
in navigable water associated with the
ornamental and recreational purposes.
construction of an artificial waterway and
The term includes any access channel or
connected or intended to be connected to the
connecting channel, any addition to or
artificial waterway, and retaining wall or other
alteration of any waterway within the meaning
works associated with such channels. The term
of this definition and any system of waterways
includes any addition or alteration to any such
within the meaning of this definition provided
channel, retaining wall or other works.
in any development of land. The term also
includes any other waterway designed for
other purposes such as drainage, but which Design life means the period over which a
is capable of use as a waterway as herein structure or a structural element remains fit for
defined. use for its intended purpose with appropriate
maintenance.
Artificial Waterway Structures means any
structures on, in or over the artificial waterway, Development has the same meaning given
and includes jetties, launching ramps, bridges, the term in the Planning and Development Act
moorings and water control structures. 2005.
Boat Harbour means an area of protected Floodplain means the extent of flooding in
navigable waters where boats can shelter and a 1 to 100-year flood event for a particular
where boat-to-shore (and vice versa) transfers watercourse, which includes the floodway and
of people or goods can be made. Includes the flood fringe areas.
associated land, breakwaters and dredged
waterways. Floodway means the area of land that would
be affected by river flooding in a 1 to 100-year
Canal Estate means a development or flood event for a particular watercourse, where
subdivision that adjoins or directly influences development and land uses should be limited
an existing or proposed artificial waterway. For to those which would not affect the flow of
planning purposes, any development where the floodwaters.
titles to the subdivided lots extend into, abut or
are proximate to an artificial waterway shall be Flood fringe means the area of land that would
deemed to be part of a canal estate unless the be affected by river flooding in a 1 to 100-
WAPC determines otherwise. year flood event, where development would
normally be permitted subject to a specified
Canal Zone means a zone (as created within minimum habitable floor level above the
an operative town planning scheme) within relevant 1 in 100-year flood level to provide
which an artificial waterway or canal estate is adequate flood protection.
permitted. Individual areas of land included
within a canal zone are subject to specific Foreshore Reserve means a reserve
provisions of that town planning scheme which established for the management and protection
may restrict development to certain types or of the foreshore of a natural waterway.
classes.

Marina means a discrete set of facilities
operating under one management body within
a boat harbour which provides safe permanent
moorings and other boat related services for
a group of small craft. There may be more
than one marina operating within a single boat
harbour.
Natural water body means the water body
adjacent to a proposed canal estate that will
be used to provide the source water for natural
flushing.
Navigation Aids means aids such as lights,
leads, buoys and beacons installed to guide
the safe navigation of vessels.
Navigable Waters for the purpose of this
policy means rivers, lakes, inlets and other
waters on which any vessel or any type of
marine craft can be navigated.
Waterway Banks means all natural or
constructed boundaries to the waters,
extending from the waterway bed to the upper
level of the flood and wave affected waterway
shore. This upper level shall be defined with
respect to a 1: 100-year flood event.
Waterway Bed means land below the water of
the artificial waterway.
Waterway Management Authority means the
authority responsible for managing a natural
waterway. Where the waterway is water defined
under the Waterways Conservation Act 1976
or the Swan and Canning Rivers Management
Act 2006, it is the agency specified in that
legislation.
Waterways manager means the agency
(normally local government) responsible for
the management, monitoring and maintenance
works within the boundaries of the water
bodies of an artificial waterway and its entrance
channel.
46 Western Australian Planning Commission – May 2012