Department of Planning,
Lands and Heritage
Position
Statement:
Container Deposit Scheme
Infrastructure
September 2020
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the Department © State of Western Australia website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, Published by the email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this Western Australian Planning Commission
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the Gordon Stephenson House tel: 08 6551 8002
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for 140 William Street fax: 08 6551 9001
any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result Perth WA 6000 National Relay Service: 13 36 77
of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect This document is available in alternative
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred Locked Bag 2506 formats on application to the
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before Perth WA 6001 Communications Branch.
applying the information contained in this document to Published September 2020
particular circumstances.

Position Statement:
1
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure
September 2020
1 Policy intent 2 Container deposit 3 Application of this
schemes in Western position statement
This position statement outlines how
Australia
container deposit scheme infrastructure
This position statement applies across
should be considered and assessed in the
Western Australia to all CDS infrastructure.
The State Government is implementing
Western Australian planning system.
a Container Deposit Scheme (CDS) to
complement existing kerbside recycling
services. The CDS provides for a refund
to be paid to any person who returns
an eligible beverage container through
the scheme. The CDS operates by the
return of containers via various container
return points which, in the context of the
position statement, are referred to as CDS
infrastructure. The CDS is not intended to
collect normal household waste.
The role of planning in implementing the
CDS is to ensure that the infrastructure
required to facilitate the scheme is
established in appropriate locations.

Position Statement:
2
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure
September 2020
4 Policy objectives 5 Policy measures Reverse vending machines: These the-counter / bag drop return points, these
are permanently-located, unattended facilities are likely to service a significantly
This position statement seeks to achieve 5.1 Container Deposit Scheme infrastructure that accept the return of larger turnover of customers and have
the following objectives: infrastructure empty beverage containers in exchange greater storage demands.
for a refund. Reverse vending machines
• ensure a coordinated approach to
Container deposit recycling centres will
the provision of CDS infrastructure There are broadly five types of CDS come in various shapes and sizes.
generally only accept, store and sort
throughout WA infrastructure to facilitate the return of Small reverse vending machines are similar materials collected in accordance with, and
containers in WA. These are:
• ensure that appropriate locations in size to ‘traditional’ food and drink regulated by, the State’s CDS management
are chosen for the installation of CDS Container collection cages: This vending machines, and can be located in framework and associated contractual
infrastructure infrastructure comprises a cage which shopping centres, train stations or other agreements (plastic, glass and aluminium
containers are placed in and stored before public places where people are likely to drink containers). They differ from resource
• ensure the timely roll-out of
collection and return for refund. These return one or two containers at a time. recovery, waste storage and other industry
infrastructure in support of the
cages will generally be donation points, Small reverse vending machines will land uses, as they do not deal with organic,
scheme’s establishment and ongoing
rather than refund points. They may generally be incidental to the predominant toxic or large-scale waste material, with
operational needs
be located in association with schools, land use, often located internally or the associated issues of odour, risk or other
• establish minimum development sporting or other clubs or not-for-profit adjacent high traffic locations such as off-site impact.
requirements to exempt certain CDS organisations. Individuals will deposit the foyers and passageways. Accordingly,
Large-scale facilities: These include
infrastructure from requiring planning containers into the collection cages and small reverse vending machines are likely
uses such as resource recovery centres,
approval, for adoption by local the receiving organisation will arrange to be exempt from requiring development
waste storage facilities and other industrial
governments. collection of the containers and receive the approvals.
uses that are defined under the Planning
refund as a donation to their organisation.
Large reverse vending machines (see page 9) and Development (Local Planning Scheme)
In shop / over-the-counter / bag are generally mounted onto a storage Regulations 2015 (the Regulations), as well
drop return points: This infrastructure structure similar to a sea container. Their as other definitions included in existing
incorporates the use of a new or existing location of large reverse vending machines local planning schemes. Existing facilities
retail outlet, or shop, where participants may vary, but they could be placed within may be expanded for uses associated
can deposit individual containers or bags existing commercial or industrial premises. with the CDS, or new large-scale facilities
of containers for collection and return These machines allow for greater volume established.
by the retailer on behalf of the scheme, of returns and it is likely that participants
with a refund given to the participant. would travel to these sites with a variety of
5.2 Assessing Container Deposit
This infrastructure will typically be located eligible containers.
Scheme infrastructure
within existing retail and commercial
Container deposit recycling centres:
areas. The collection of containers should
This infrastructure, depicted on page 5.2.1 Incidental development
be incidental to a predominantly retail
10 and 11, provides solely for the return
function. Generally, CDS infrastructure will be
of eligible containers for refund and
incidental to the existing use of a lot. For
associated sorting and storage in bulk.
example, a small reverse vending machine
While similar in nature to in shop / over-
in a supermarket would be incidental to

Position Statement:
3
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure
September 2020
the use of the land as a shop, as would be character of the local area. A number of 5.2.3.2 Container collection cages The operations, including access, parking
an over-the-counter or bag drop return key considerations will apply universally requirements and the need for service
Where collection cages are located in
point. when considering applications for CDS vehicles to access the return points, are
association with a school, sporting or other
infrastructure development identical to that of a shop. On this basis,
Development approval may be required club, and on land which is managed by
return points should be assessed as a shop,
to install infrastructure outside an existing The key matters for consideration include: State or local government, the collection
in accordance with the requirements of
building. cage will be incidental to the predominant
• Local amenity — how does the relevant local planning scheme.
use of the site. As such, the collection
If approval is required for CDS the infrastructure fit in with the
cage is likely to fall under the public works For shops, the operations of the return
infrastructure, it should be assessed in surrounding built context? Does it
exemptions which generally apply to local point need to be contained within the
accordance with the requirements of impact upon visual amenity, or result in
and State Government developments, building, including any manual sorting,
Parts 7 and 8 of the deemed provisions in the vegetation removal which requires
under the Planning and Development Act low-scale crushing and storage. Approval
Schedule 2 of the Regulations. offset? What are its hours of operation
2005, the Metropolitan, Peel and Greater would be required to extend outside the
and timing of service vehicles
Bunbury Region Schemes and local approved operational boundaries of an
5.2.2 Pre-lodgement consultation attending the return point?
planning schemes. existing building used as a shop. Food
Proponents seeking to install CDS • Car parking — is additional parking shops that are considered a Food Business
The management of these collection cages
infrastructure should engage with the required to service the return point? under the Food Act 2008 should seek local
should be included in any leasing or other
relevant local government(s) as part Will it impact the existing car parking government advice before considering the
operational arrangements that are in place
of the site selection process. This early requirements of the site? operation of an in shop CDS return point.
to manage the use of these buildings and
engagement will allow local government
• Accessibility — is it universally land.
to assess if the site being proposed is 5.2.3.4 Small reverse vending machines
accessible? Will its location have
appropriate, and how it might relate to Where collection cages are sought to
an impact on pedestrian or Due to the small-scale nature of this type
the CDS network more broadly as well be located on private land they should
vehicular circulation? Is appropriate of CDS infrastructure, with footprints
as servicing considerations. The matters be subject to the same requirements as
manoeuvring space provided to allow generally less than three square metres,
outlined below should be considered reverse vending machines identified by
service vehicle access? it is expected that small reverse vending
when determining if a location is this position statement.
machines will be exempt from requiring
appropriate for CDS infrastructure. • Waste and recycling bins — does the
any development approvals.
infrastructure necessitate the provision 5.2.3.3 In shop / over-the-counter /
5.2.3 Assessment considerations of waste bins to dispose of goods that bag drop return points
5.2.3.5 Large reverse vending machines
are not accepted by the CDS in a tidy
The CDS is, in essence, the return of
5.2.3.1 General assessment manner? containers that were purchased from a Due to the variety of sizes and potential
considerations
• Signage — what size and scale is shop. The transaction is the same as any locations for large reverse vending
CDS infrastructure and return points are appropriate for signage or screens? other transaction that occurs in a shop machines, development applications
likely to come in many varying shapes, except in reverse, with the customer may be required to consider any impacts
• Safety and security — does its location
sizes and typologies. Importantly, return bringing goods to the shop and leaving on nearby existing sensitive land uses.
allow for passive surveillance, and what
points should be designed and located without goods. This position statement seeks to outline
form of lighting is provided?
so that they are sympathetic to the

Position Statement:
4
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure
September 2020
where exemptions for large reverse • Car parking — parking requirements It is intended that this definition will be 5.3 Exemptions for collection
vending machines may apply, for local should have regard for the generally incorporated into the Regulations as a cages and large reverse
governments to consider and adopt. quick turnover of users, and the co- model provision, when the Regulations are vending machines
location of such return points with uses next amended.
Large reverse vending machines should Local governments are encouraged to
where trips are likely to be shared.
not to be confused with sea containers The WAPC’s position is that container adopt a local planning policy to ensure
or subjected to assessment under local • Car queuing — if the proposal is to deposit recycling centres are suitable for that specified CDS development and
planning policies which seek to control the incorporate a facility for members of development in mixed business/service works are exempt from the requirement to
location and use of sea containers in the the public to drive into the building, commercial and bulky goods areas, along obtain development approval, pursuant to
urban environment. to effectively manage vehicles, the with some commercial and light/service Schedule 2, Part 7, Clause 61(1) and (2)(e)
development should have designated industrial areas. Proposals in centre/ of the Regulations. Particular consideration
5.2.3.6 Container deposit recycling car queuing much like that provided at shopping/town centre type zones should should be given to exempting collection
centres a fast food outlet (see diagram – be considered on a case-by-case basis, cages and large reverse vending machines
Container deposit recycling centres rely on Car queuing). with regard for neighbouring amenity, within supermarket and shopping centre
being convenient, accessible and visible. • Distance to residential — a distance particularly where residential land uses are car parks.
located nearby.
These return points are likely to provide a of 200m should be maintained from Large reverse vending machine or
customer interface which provides for the the building in which a centre operates collection cage proposals which vary the
5.2.3.7 Large-scale facilities
quick turnover of users, and are therefore to the boundary of a lot used for provisions outlined in an adopted local
best collocated with land uses where trips residential purposes. A residential For large-scale facilities in industrial areas, planning policy, or where no policy exists,
can be shared. Accordingly, it is anticipated purpose means any lot that has a where processing recyclables and storage will require development approval.
that these return points might typically be residential component (e.g. mixed use). of other waste materials occurs, the normal
A model local planning policy is contained
found in ‘big box’ commercial precincts. considerations under Schedule 2 Parts 7
In preparing and assessing development in Appendix 1. Local government is
and 8 of the Regulations apply.
Where the development of a container applications, it is reasonable that a variety encouraged to consider and adopt this
It is possible that existing large-scale
deposit recycling centre is proposed, of different land uses might currently be model local planning policy.
facilities that will accept containers
the following key matters should be
used to account for container deposit
arising from the CDS would be operating Where a local government resolves
considered:
recycling centres, or that an application
consistent with existing approvals. to adopt the model local planning
• Visual appearance — the development could be deemed as a use not listed by the However, a development application policy provided at Appendix 1 without
should integrate seamlessly with local planning scheme. The WAPC defines would be required for new or upgraded modification, pursuant to Schedule 2, Part
surrounding development, and not container deposit recycling centres as: facilities. 2, Clause 4(1) of the Regulations the WAPC
propose outdoor sorting or storage container deposit recycling centre agrees that advertising of the proposed
which is visible from the public realm. means a refund point that has or can policy shall not be required.
• Onsite operations — generally, only the accommodate facilities for consolidating The local government, prior to making
return, sorting and storage of material or sorting of empty containers pending a resolution to adopt the model local
associated with the CDS should occur. collection for the purposes of the planning policy without modification and
container deposit scheme.

Position Statement:
5
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure
September 2020
not advertise the policy, is required to 6 Other matters 6.2 Building approval
notify the WAPC of its intention to do so, in
accordance with Clause 4(1). 6.1 Applications for A building permit may be required to
development approval be sought and issued prior to container
Where a local government determines deposit scheme infrastructure being
to prepare a new local planning policy to If development approval is required, erected on site even if development
deal with CDS infrastructure, or modify applications are to be submitted to the approval is not required for t of some
the model local planning policy provided, relevant local government in accordance forms of CDS infrastructure, particularly
all requirements of Clause 4, including with the requirements of Schedule 2 Part those specified in Appendix 1.
advertising, shall apply. 8 of the Regulations, together with the
Accordingly, proponents should liaise
Note — the zoning and land use terms following information: with the relevant local government
used by the model local planning policy • a site plan showing the proposed noting that a Building Permit is required
are consistent with the terms provided location of the infrastructure on the for any building or structure not listed by
by the model provisions for local property and the location of any Schedule 4 of the Building Regulations 2012,
planning schemes of the Regulations. existing buildings/structures which deals with building work for which a
Where planning schemes have not been building permit is not required.
• plans, dimensions and details of the
amended to be consistent with the model
infrastructure
provision, the local government may
6.3 Compliance
amend these terms to be consistent with • photographs/diagrams of any the
its planning scheme. proposed supporting or storage If CDS infrastructure is installed, and in the
structure(s) opinion of the local government it is not in
accordance with the exemptions outline
• details of proposed modifications
in an adopted local planning policy, a local
and other works to be carried out
government may require development
to improve appearance and address
application for the infrastructure to be
amenity concerns
lodged for assessment.
Local governments reserve the right to
request any other information deemed
necessary to assess applications in
accordance with the requirements of
a Local Planning Scheme and/or Local
Planning Policy.

Position Statement:
6
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure
September 2020
Appendix 1
Model Local Planning Policy
Container deposit scheme development provisions
Purpose
To provide an exemption in accordance with Clause 61(1)(i) and (2)(e) of the Planning and Development (Local
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 from the requirement to obtain development approval for container
deposit scheme infrastructure proposals which satisfy minimum development standards.
Objectives
• To ensure the location, design and siting of CDS infrastructure is complementary to the character,
functionality and amenity of urban localities.
• To prevent negative impacts on local amenity from the operation of CDS infrastructure.
• To enable the timely, cost-effective delivery of essential CDS infrastructure.
• To provide conveniently-located infrastructure to ensure the CDS provides for effective reduction of litter,
increased recycling and protection of the environmentt.
Definitions / abbreviations
the Heritage Act means the Heritage Act 2018.
the Regulations means the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
prepared under the Planning and Development Act 2005.
heritage protected place has the meaning given by the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015 prepared under the Planning and Development Act 2005.
the Noise Regulations means Environmental Protection (Noise) Regulations 1997 (as amended) prepared
under the Environmental Protection Act 1986.
the Scheme means the City/Shire [DELETE AS APPLICABLE] of [INSERT NAME] Local Planning
Scheme No. [INSERT NUMBER].
container deposit scheme infrastructure means a reverse vending machine or a container collection cage.
reverse vending machine means a permanently-located unattended device that accepts empty beverage
containers, and is incidental the predominant land use.
container collection cage means a cage, or other structure, that is designed to store containers deposited at
return points, and is incidental to the predominant land use.
total lot area means the total land area of a freehold or survey strata lot.
Statutory provisions
Development approval will not be required for container deposit scheme infrastructure proposals that comply
with the provisions of this policy, in accordance with Clause 61(1)(i) and (2)(e) of the deemed provisions of the
scheme provided for by the Regulations, unless the development is proposed on land in a heritage-protected
place.
Container deposit scheme infrastructure proposed to be erected on a temporary basis of not more than 48
hours within a 12-month period are typically exempt from approval, as per the requirements of 61(1)(f) and
(2)(d) of the deemed provisions provided in the Regulations and contained within the Scheme. As such, the
policy provisions would not apply.

Position Statement:
7
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure
September 2020
Policy provisions
1. Specified exemptions
1.1 The development or operation of a large reverse vending machine is development for which development approval is
not required where it complies with all the relevant development standards outlined below (unless otherwise agreed by
the local government), and may take place in any zone, with the exception of:
(a) residential, urban development, and special residential zones; and
(b) rural, rural residential, and rural smallholding zones.
1.2 The development of a container collection cage is development for which development approval is not required
where it complies with all the relevant development standards outlined below (unless otherwise agreed by the local
government), and may take place in any zone, including a residential or rural zone or public purpose reserve where the
land is lawfully used for the purposes of:
(a) civic use; and/or
(b) community purpose; and/or
(c) educational establishment.
2. Development standards
General
2.1 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed, the
infrastructure must not result in any change to the approved land use in a way that would result in the use no longer
complying with any relevant development standards and/or requirements of the Scheme.
Location
2.2 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed, the
infrastructure must not be erected within 10 metres of an adjoining lot boundary that accommodates a residential use.
2.3 Where the development of a reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed, the infrastructure
must not restrict any vehicular or pedestrian access to or from, or entry to any building on, the land on which the
infrastructure is located.
2.4 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed, the
infrastructure must not obstruct the operation of, or access to, any utility services on the land on which the infrastructure
is located or on adjacent land.
2.5 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed, to preserve
pedestrian and vehicular sightlines, and servicing access, the infrastructure must not be erected within two (2) metres
of any road reserve or right-of-way intersection or crossover, and shall be located in such a way that it does not reduce
existing car park sightlines, aisle widths and manoeuvring spaces.
2.6 Where the development of a container collection cage is proposed, the collection cage must be located in a car park or
service area to be visually unobtrusive, and must be secured, locked and immovable.
Visual amenity
2.7 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed outdoors,
placement of the infrastructure must not result in the removal of any vegetation, landscaping or street tree.
2.8 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed outdoors,
the infrastructure must be constructed and clad with low-reflective, graffiti-resistant materials, which provide protection
from the elements and, where not consisting of promotional or branding material approved under the operation of the
container deposit scheme, are consistent in colour and finish to that of nearby existing buildings.
2.9 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed outdoors, the
infrastructure must not display any advertising signage other than promotional or brand signage approved under the
operation of the container deposit scheme.
2.10 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine is proposed outdoors, and the infrastructure exceeds a
development footprint of 10 square metres, bins for the removal of waste or recyclable materials not accepted by the
infrastructure are to be provided, and serviced regularly to maintain the amenity of the area, at a rate of one (1) waste bin
and 0.5 recycling bins (both 240L in volume) per 10 square metres of development footprint.

Position Statement:
8
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure
September 2020
Operational amenity
2.11 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed, the operation
of the infrastructure must not prejudicially affect the amenity of the locality due to the emission of light, noise, vibration,
electrical interference, smell or any other by-product.
2.12 Where the development or operation of a large reverse vending machine is proposed adjacent to land that
accommodates a residential use, the machine must operate only between the approved opening hours of the
predominant land use, or in the absence of any other use:
(a) between 7.00 am and 7.00 pm Monday to Saturday; and
(b) between 9.00 am and 7.00 pm on Sunday and public holidays.
2.13 Where the development or operation of a large reverse vending machine is proposed, the reverse vending machine
when in operation must not emit noise at a level which exceeds any requirement(s) under the Noise Regulations.
2.14 Where the development or operation of a large reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed,
the infrastructure must be provided with lighting that complies with AS/NZS 1158.3.1: 2005 Lighting for roads and public
spaces, Part 3.1: Pedestrian area (Category P) lighting—Performance and design requirements (as amended).
2.15 Where the development or operation of a large reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed,
the infrastructure must be accessible to any person with a disability.
Development footprint
2.16 Where the development of a container collection cage is proposed outdoors, the cage must not:
(a) have a development footprint of more than eight (8) square metres; or
(b) be more than two (2) metres in height.
2.17 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine is proposed outdoors, on land not used for car parking,
the machine must not:
(a) have a development footprint of more than 45 square metres; and
(b) be more than three (3) metres in height, or have dimensions greater than eight (8) metres by six (6) metres.
2.18 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine is proposed within an existing car park comprising more
than 40 car parking spaces, the area occupied by the reverse vending machine must not exceed the greater of the
following areas:
(a) the area comprising four (4) car parking spaces; or
(b) 45 square metres, where the car park contains 200 car parking spaces or less; or
(c) 75 square metres, where the car park contains 200 or more car parking spaces.
2.19 Where the development of a large reverse vending machine and/or container collection cage is proposed outdoors,
the infrastructure shall be installed at a rate no greater than:
(a) container collections cage – one (1) per lot;
(b) large reverse vending machine proposed on land not used for car parking – one (1) per 15,000 square metres of
total lot area; or
(c) large reverse vending machine proposed in an existing car park comprising more than 40 car parking spaces –
one (1) per 1000 car parking spaces.

Position Statement:
9
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure
September 2020
Large reverse vending machine

Position Statement:
10
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure
September 2020
Container deposit recycling centre

Position Statement:
11
Container Deposit Scheme Infrastructure
September 2020
designated car queuing
parking bays
shed/
warehouse
Exit
Entry
Car queuing at recycling centre
Car queuing at a recycling centre