THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL GAZETTED COPY OF THE GOVERNMENT GAZETTE
GAZETTED COPIES CAN BE OBTAINED FROM STATE LAW PUBLISHER
GAZETTAL DATE: TUESDAY 10 JUNE 2003, SPECIAL GAZETTE NO.90
THIS COPY IS A REFERENCE DOCUMENT AND IN INSTANCES OF DISPUTE OR
LITIGATION THE PUBLISHED TEXT MUST BE USED
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN PLANNING
COMMISSION
STATEMENT OF PLANNING POLICY No. 2
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL
RESOURCES POLICY
PREPARED UNDER SECTION 5AA OF THE TOWN
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT ACT 1928

10 June 2003 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2047
CONTENTS
1. CITATION
2. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
3. APPLICATION OF THE POLICY
4. OBJECTIVES
5. POLICY MEASURES
5.1 General Measures
5.2 Water Resources
5.3 Air Quality
5.4 Soil and Land Quality
5.5 Biodiversity
5.6 Agricultural Land and Rangelands
5.7 Minerals, Petroleum and Basic Raw Material Resources
5.8 Marine Resources and Aquaculture
5.9 Landscape
5.10 Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Energy Efficiency
6. IMPLEMENTATION
7. REFERENCES
Environment and Natural Resources Policy

10 June 2003 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2048
Environment and Natural Resources Policy

10 June 2003 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2049
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN PLANNING COMMISSION
STATEMENT OF PLANNING POLICY No. 2
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES POLICY
PREPARED UNDER SECTION 5AA OF THE TOWN PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT ACT 1928
1. CITATION
This a Statement of Planning Policy made under Section 5AA of the Town Planning and Development Act
1928. This policy may be cited as the Statement of Planning Policy: Environment and Natural Resources
Policy.
2. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Western Australia is one of the most biologically diverse regions in the world, home to a broad range of
ecological communities and species, and natural landscapes. The State’s vast areas encompass rich and
extensive agricultural, pastoral, marine and mineral resources. The protection and wise management of
the environment and natural resources of the State are of paramount importance if we are to maintain our
lifestyle now and into the future. This requires acknowledgement of the intrinsic value of the environment,
as well as an understanding of the importance of ecological processes in the production and maintenance
of healthy soils, clean air and water: the natural resource base which supports life and our lifestyle. It is
therefore essential to resolve land use conflicts between use and protection of natural resources, having
consideration of potential impacts on the environment, as well as those on community lifestyle and the
economy.
The concept of sustainability in terms of our natural environment and resources is established in the State
Planning Strategy (1997), which is directed towards ensuring a balance between economic growth and the
conservation and enhancement of our natural environment in order to provide a better quality of life for
the present and into the future. The concept of sustainability is further refined in the draft Western
Australian State Sustainability Strategy (2002) as meeting the needs of current and future generations
through simultaneous environmental, social and economic improvement.
The Sustainability Strategy vision for Western Australia in terms of the sustainable use of natural
resources is: ‘Western Australia's vast landscape and seascape, intricate web of biodiversity and other
natural resources are managed and used sustainably for the common good and the community is involved
in management and planning processes that are transparent and visionary’. This focus on sustainability
reflects national agreements such as the National Strategy for Ecologically Sustainable Development
(1992) and the National Strategy for the Conservation of Australias Biological Diversity (1996). As well,
there are global obligations to protect natural resources through international treaties.
The key to sustainability in the planning sector is integrating ecological, economic and social
considerations into decision-making. This policy sets out the key principles of how this can be done with
environment and natural resource issues.
In order to meet the objectives of sustainability, there is a clear need to protect our land, air and water,
vital resources that support our diverse range of flora, fauna and ecosystems, from unacceptable levels of
loss or degradation. This involves the maintenance of vital ecological processes and systems on which life
depends, and an understanding of how these complex systems, our natural resources, interact within
Western Australia.
The Environment Western Australia 1998: State of the Environment Report (1998) and subsequent
updates describe the condition of the environment and natural resource use sectors, including associated
pressures. The report prioritises specific environmental issues in terms of environmental status and
proposes responses to these, including the identification of environmental indicators for each of the
important environmental issues.
The draft Western Australian State Sustainability Strategy (2002) reaffirms the proposals of the
Government Framework to Assist in Achieving Sustainable Natural Resource Management in Western
Australia (1999) in the need for an integrated and co-ordinated approach to the management of natural
resources in the State. It proposes a framework of principles, visions and actions to develop effective
partnerships between all stakeholders including the community, industry, and local government. It also
recognises that local government and State government statutory planning powers can be used to
implement natural resource and environmental issues. The Western Australian Planning Commission
(WAPC) acknowledges the role given to Regional Groups in the Cabinet endorsed Natural Resource
Management Framework, and is committed to assisting these groups to achieve government policy
objectives.
Careful assessment will be required to resolve conflicts between land use and protection of natural
resources, giving consideration to potential impacts on the environment, community lifestyle preferences,
and economic values. This requires an understanding of the competing pressures of development and
environmental protection, together with the economics of sustainable land use and management practices,
Environment and Natural Resources Policy

10 June 2003 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2050
advances in technology, and the priorities of the community. Land use planning decisions will often seek
to minimise trade-offs in order to achieve the best outcome for the community, the environment and the
economy.
Integrated land use planning and management is a practical way to achieve effective and efficient use of
the natural resources of the State. There is a clear and explicit need to incorporate environmental
considerations and resource management into the planning process to ensure that decisions are made in the
context of potential impacts on the environment and our natural resources. In the same way, it is possible
for more use to be made of the planning system in managing these issues. It is possible to achieve land use
change and development that have positive environmental outcomes or that reduce the degree of negative
impact on the environment.
The Environment and Natural Resources (ENR) policy is a broad, sector issue policy under Statement of
Planning Policy No. 8: State Planning Framework Policy. It defines the principles and considerations that
represent good and responsible planning in terms of environment and natural resource issues within the
framework of the State Planning Strategy. The ENR policy will be supplemented by more detailed
planning policies on particular natural resources matters that require additional information and guidance.
These supplementary policies may also be Statements of Planning Policy and should be implemented in
conjunction with this policy.
3. APPLICATION OF THE POLICY
The policy applies throughout Western Australia.
4. OBJECTIVES
The objectives of this policy are:
ß to integrate environment and natural resource management with broader land use planning and
decision-making;
ß to protect, conserve and enhance the natural environment; and
ß to promote and assist in the wise and sustainable use and management of natural resources.
5. POLICY MEASURES
The above objectives provide the context for the policy measures which are set out below under the
following headings:
ß General Measures
ß Water Resources
ß Air Quality
ß Soil and Land Quality
ß Biodiversity
ß Agricultural Land and Rangelands
ß Minerals, Petroleum and Basic Raw Materials
ß Marine Resources and Aquaculture
ß Landscapes
ß Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Energy Efficiency
5.1 General Measures
The implementation of planning decisions can have an impact on the environment and other natural
resources. The following policy measures recognise the significance of natural resources, and should be
read in conjunction with the more specific statements on aspects of natural resources that follow.
Planning strategies, schemes and decision-making should:
(i) Avoid development that may result in unacceptable environmental damage.
(ii) Actively seek opportunities for improved environmental outcomes including support for
development which provides for environmental restoration or enhancement.
(iii) Take account of the availability and condition of natural resources, based on best available
information at the time.
(iv) Protect significant natural, indigenous and cultural features, including sites and features
significant as habitats and for their floral, cultural, built, archaeological, ethnographic, geological,
geomorphological, visual or wilderness values.
(v) Take into account the potential for economic, environmental and social (including cultural)
effects on natural resources.
Environment and Natural Resources Policy

10 June 2003 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2051
(vi) Recognise that certain natural resources, including biological resources, are restricted to
particular areas and that these geographical areas or land types may need to be identified
accordingly and appropriate provision made to protect the areas for the use of those resources.
(vii) Take account of the potential for on-site and off-site impacts of land use on the environment,
natural resources and natural systems1.
(viii) Safeguard and enhance areas of environmental significance on the coast including the marine
environment.
(ix) Ensure use and development on or adjacent to the coast is compatible with its future sustainable
use for conservation, recreation and tourism in appropriate areas.
(x) Support conservation, protection and management of native remnant vegetation where possible,
to enhance soil and land quality, water quality, biodiversity, fauna habitat, landscape, amenity
values and ecosystem function.
(xi) Consider alternatives to land acquisition for conservation and landscape protection where limited
or no public access is required.
(xii) Take into account the potential for impacts from changes in climate and weather on human
activities and cultural heritage including coastal and urban communities, natural systems and
water resources.
(xiii) Consider any relevant accredited Natural Resource Management Regional Strategy, or catchment
management strategies prepared by catchment groups and endorsed by State government
agencies, with a view to integrating implementation of appropriate and relevant parts through
town planning schemes and assessment of developments.
5.2 Water Resources
Water is fundamental to human life and the environment. The careful management of water resources,
both in terms of quantity and quality, is therefore essential to support natural ecosystems as well as future
growth and development. This includes water catchments, waterways, wetlands, estuaries and the marine
environment.
The State Water Quality Management Strategy for Western Australia (2001) (SWQMS) is the State
framework for implementation of the National Water Quality Management Strategy (1994) (NWQMS).
The prime objective of the NWQMS is 'to achieve sustainable use of the nation's water resources by
protecting and enhancing their quality while maintaining economic and social development.' This ENR
Policy is thus consistent with the guiding principles of the NWQMS and the SWQMS, as well as the
Wetlands Conservation Policy for WA (1997), which aims to prevent further loss or degradation of
valuable wetlands in Western Australia.
Planning strategies, schemes and decision making should:
(i) Consider mechanisms to protect, manage, conserve and enhance:
a. wetlands of importance, Ramsar wetlands and wetlands identified in any relevant
Environmental Protection Policy;
b. waterways;
c. estuaries;
d. marine environments;
e. gazetted public drinking water source areas; and
f. other water sources which sustain catchments and identified environmental values.
(ii) Take account of the availability of water resources to ensure maintenance of water quality and
quantity for existing and future environmental and human uses.
(iii) Encourage urban water management through water sensitive design approaches that better
manage stormwater quality and quantity; that reduce the impact of stormwater flows to streams,
wetlands and coastal waters; and that control or remove pollutants and nutrients so as to improve
water quality, retain habitats, conserve water and provide for recreational opportunities and
conservation functions through multiple use drainage systems.
(iv) Ensure the provision of adequate setbacks between development and the foreshores of wetlands,
waterways, estuaries and the coast, in order to maintain or improve the ecological and physical
function of water bodies. Such setbacks will aim to maintain the natural drainage function,
protect wildlife habitats and landscape values, lessen erosion of banks and verges, and facilitate
filtration of sediment and waste associated with surface run-off from adjacent land uses, which
may include retention or replacement of riparian vegetation.
1 This includes threatening processes, which are processes which threaten or may threaten the
survival, abundance or evolutionary development of a native species or ecological community.
The Commonwealth's Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
provides for the identification and listing of key threatening processes such as dieback, land
clearance or predation by feral cats.
Environment and Natural Resources Policy

10 June 2003 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2052
(v) Consider flood risk by identifying floodways and land affected by 1 in 100 year flood events and
avoid intensifying the potential for flooding as a result of inappropriately located land uses and
development.
(vi) Consider the risks associated with nuisance or disease vector insects, in particular mosquitoes
and midges, and ensure appropriate measures are applied to manage potential conflicts with
community amenity and health, and environmental values.
5.3 Air Quality
Air quality is a local, national and global concern. At the global scale, the key natural resource
management issues are the emission of greenhouse gases, which has been linked to climatic changes,
primarily in temperature and rainfall, and the depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer that affects the
amount of ultraviolet light reaching the Earth.
Regional and local air quality problems are primarily the result of industrial and domestic emissions,
vehicle use and land use practices such as agriculture and forestry. In Western Australia the key regional
and local air quality issues are photochemical smog and haze from particulates (solid and liquid), sulphur
dioxide, dust and air toxics.
Western Australia has adopted the National Environmental Protection Measure for Ambient Air Quality
(1998) which sets air quality standards for each major air pollutant. The Air Quality Management Plan for
Perth (2000) proposes to address issues of air quality in Perth through a number of strategies including
better integration of land use and transport planning.
Planning strategies, schemes and decision-making should:
(i) Promote urban development patterns, densities and form that support reduced travel demand,
increased availability and access to public transport and that encourage walking and cycling.
(ii) Have regard to the potential for conflict between sensitive land uses and activities with air
emission impacts.
(iii) Have regard to the relevant requirements of the National Environmental Protection Measure for
Ambient Air Quality (1998), the Environmental Protection (Kwinana) (Atmospheric Waste)
Policy (1992), the Environmental Protection (Goldfields residential areas)(sulphur dioxide)
Policy (1992) and Statement of Planning Policy No. 4: State Industrial Buffer Policy.
5.4 Soil and Land Quality
Land is an essential physical and economic resource, which is fundamental to the existence of flora and
fauna and is essential to maintaining biodiversity. Changes in the environment, such as extensive land
clearing for agriculture and settlement, and intensification of land use, can have a profound effect on land
quality by removing its protective cover and creating the potential for erosion, salinity and loss of soil and
water quality. Land is used for a variety of purposes. Careful consideration is necessary to ensure land is
allocated to appropriate uses that minimise land degradation and resource use conflicts. Specific
consideration should be given to land capability and suitability, and exploration of different options for
use when decisions are made about the future use and development of land. Soil contamination, wind and
water erosion, acidity, loss of soil cover and biodiversity, water logging and salinity are particular issues
requiring attention.
The Report of the Salinity Taskforce (2001) and the Government Response to the Salinity Taskforce
Report: Salinity: a new balance (2002) set out a strategy to manage salinity and outline the management
options and tools that are available to landholders across the south-west agricultural zone. It highlights the
need for urgent and large-scale intervention on the hydrological system if the Strategy’s goals are to be
achieved. This policy is consistent with the goals and strategic approach of the Salinity Taskforce.
Planning strategies, schemes and decision-making should:
(i) Have regard to the capability of land to accommodate different land uses and developments,
including erosion hazard, the absorptive capacity of soils, slope stability, potential for variable
settlement or subsidence, active fault lines and dune migration.
(ii) Recognise and consider land that is degraded or contaminated, or has the potential to become so,
and facilitate its rehabilitation or remediation for appropriate future use.
(iii) Ensure that land uses that may result in land contamination such as storage of chemicals, waste,
other toxic materials or liquid fuel are not permitted unless it can be demonstrated that the
proposed activities will not result in contamination of land or adverse effects on future land use.
(iv) Identify existing and potential areas affected by salinity, acid sulphate soils or other severe land
degradation problems and, where appropriate, facilitate measures such as promoting vegetation
retention, replanting in groundwater recharge areas, and prevention of inappropriate
development, in order to reduce impacts on land, buildings and infrastructure.
Environment and Natural Resources Policy

10 June 2003 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2053
5.5 Biodiversity
Biodiversity describes the variability among living organisms from all sources (including terrestrial,
marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are part) and includes
diversity within and between species and the diversity of ecosystems.2
Biological diversity underpins ecological processes essential for maintenance of marine and estuarine
quality, soil fertility and clean, fresh water and air. Biodiversity is also fundamental to the quality and
character of the landscape and in providing recreational opportunities, aesthetic value and cultural identity.
Planning should recognise the State’s biodiversity in considering changes of land use, including
consideration of any future potential value, such as for medicinal purposes or as a source of genetic
material.
The protection and enhancement of biodiversity is guided by the National Strategy for the Conservation of
Australia’s Biological Diversity (1996) and the National Objectives and Targets for Biodiversity
Conservation 2001-05. There are also a number of statutory and non-statutory mechanisms designed to
protect, manage and conserve areas identified as of high State, regional or local biodiversity value for
Western Australia.
Planning strategies, schemes and decision-making should:
(i) Consider mechanisms to protect areas of high biodiversity and/or conservation value, including:
a. land vested in the Conservation Commission as national park, nature reserve, conservation
park or other reserve, and land acquired and managed by the Department of Conservation
and Land Management (CALM) pending formal reservation;
b. land and waters vested in the Marine Parks and Reserves Authority as marine park, marine
nature reserve or marine management area, and areas identified in the Report of the
Marine Parks and Reserves Selection Working Group;
c. land identified as a Biosphere Reserve under the UNESCO Man and Biosphere program;
d. land containing Threatened Flora or Threatened Ecological Communities (CALM
database) or that which is habitat to Threatened Fauna;
e. regionally significant vegetation within the Swan Coastal Plain area of the Perth
Metropolitan Region as identified in Bush Forever (2000);
f. areas formally recognised as having significance for conservation or biodiversity values
by the State Government as identified in management plans under the Conservation and
Land Management Act (1984), the Regional Forest Agreement (1999), regional planning
strategies, the Environmental Protection Authority (1976-1983) Conservation Reserves for
Western Australia as recommended by the Environmental Protection Authority [Systems 1
to 12] as updated from time to time, and other relevant plans and strategies;
g. Ramsar wetlands and wetlands recognised as habitat for migratory species;
h. nationally significant wetlands listed in the Directory of Important Wetlands in Australia
(2001);
i. wetlands identified in any relevant Environmental Protection Policy (EPP), such as the
Swan Coastal Plain Lakes EPP and the South-West Agricultural Zone EPP; and
j. areas listed on the World Heritage List.
(ii) Seek to avoid or minimise any adverse impacts, directly or indirectly, on areas of high
biodiversity or conservation value as a result of changes in land use or development.
(iii) Assist in establishing a comprehensive, adequate and representative conservation reserve system
throughout the State for flora, fauna habitat, landscapes, waterways, estuaries and wetlands.
(iv) Safeguard and enhance linkages between terrestrial and aquatic habitats which have become
isolated, including the re-establishment of habitat corridors.
(v) Assist the return of areas of high biodiversity conservation value to the public estate or otherwise
ensure the protection of high biodiversity conservation values through mechanisms including
planning controls or conservation covenants.
(vi) Support the use of management plans to protect areas of high biodiversity conservation value in
the long term.
5.6 Agricultural Land and Rangelands
Western Australia contains large areas devoted to agricultural pursuits such as livestock, cropping and
horticulture, as well as pastoral grazing on the arid and semi-arid rangelands of the north. These natural
resource assets require consideration in terms of ecological diversity and the environment, as well as the
social and cultural values of communities.
2 Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Environment and Natural Resources Policy

10 June 2003 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2054
In the more remote parts of the State, social issues such as rural decline is increasing the pressure on
natural resources, as a community's capacity for management decreases whilst requirements to intensify
agricultural activities are increased.
The rangelands cover over 85% of Western Australia and contain essential elements of the State’s
biological diversity. Only about 2% of Western Australia's population lives in these arid and semi-arid
lands. Pastoralism is by far the most extensive use, although these lands produce the majority of the
State’s mineral and energy wealth.
Productive agricultural land is a finite resource that must be managed sustainably for the long term.
Planning should ensure that the State’s agricultural base is protected from the unplanned loss of high
quality productive agricultural land due to permanent changes of land use, and maximise the potential of
productive farm land which is of high quality and strategic significance in the State, regional and local
context. The Statement of Planning Policy No. 11: Agricultural and Rural Land Use Planning Policy
requires identification and protection of agricultural areas of State, regional and local significance through
identification in regional planning schemes, local planning strategies and town planning schemes.
Planning strategies, schemes and decision-making should:
(i) Protect and enhance areas of agricultural significance, having regard to State, regional and local
issues and characteristics, and to the requirements of Statement of Planning Policy No. 11:
Agricultural and Rural Land Use Planning.
(ii) Consider the natural resource capability of rangelands and agricultural lands.
(iii) Diversify compatible land use activities in agricultural areas and rangelands based on principles
of sustainability and recognizing the capability and capacity of the land to support those uses.
5.7 Minerals, Petroleum and Basic Raw Material Resources
Mineral resources, petroleum resources and basic raw materials are important natural resource assets and
are a vital part of the economy, contributing 30% to Western Australia's gross domestic product. Mineral
production is very diverse with over 50 different minerals in commercial production. The main minerals
produced are iron ore, gold and alumina which, with petroleum, provide 80% of the total minerals mined
in Western Australia. Mineral exploration is managed under the Mining Act 1978.
The Western Australian Petroleum Industry accounts for a substantial portion of the State's earnings from
resources development. Onshore gas fields and pipelines carrying gas to domestic markets, processing
plants and other industrial sites, require protection in the form of setback distances and dedicated
easements, that safeguard the infrastructure and the safety of local communities. The activities of the oil
and gas industries are administered by the Department of Mineral and Petroleum Resources, using
petroleum legislation and regulations.
Basic raw materials include sand, clay, hard rock, limestone and gravel together with other construction
and road building materials. A ready supply of basic raw materials close to developing areas is required in
order to keep down the cost of land development and the price of housing. The extraction of basic raw
materials on Crown land is covered by the Mining Act 1978 while quarrying of basic raw materials on
private land is administered by local government.
Planning strategies, schemes and decision-making should:
(i) Identify and protect important and economic mineral resources to enable mineral exploration and
mining in accordance with acceptable environmental standards.
(ii) Identify and protect important basic raw material resources and provide for their extraction and
use in accordance with Statement of Planning Policy No. 10: Basic Raw Materials.
(iii) Support sequencing of uses where appropriate to maximise options and resultant benefits to
community and the environment.
(iv) Have regard to the State Gravel Supply Strategy (1998), the draft Towards a State Lime Strategy
(2001) and any other Government adopted basic raw material or mineral strategy, in considering
proposals for the extraction of basic raw materials and mineral resources.
(v) Support, where possible, improved efficiencies in the production and consumption of mineral and
basic raw material resources to ensure their availability for future environmental and human uses.
5.8 Marine Resources and Aquaculture
Commercial and recreational fishing and aquaculture are important contributors to the State's economy,
and adequate protection of marine, estuarine and riverine environments and resources that support these
industries is required.
Whilst commercial fishing activities in Western Australia are focused in the marine environment,
recreational fishing also occurs in creeks and estuaries and along the shore and contributes greater than
Environment and Natural Resources Policy

10 June 2003 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2055
$570 million annually to the State’s economy. Aquaculture continues to increase its importance, as new
land based and marine aquaculture sites are established throughout the State.
Planning should recognise and account for areas of significance and ensure compatibility of land use
planning decisions and actions associated with, and adjacent to, these areas.
Western Australia's planning system does not directly engage in planning for the marine environment.
However, the need for integrated marine planning is acknowledged, and will be assisted by the preparation
of a State marine planning strategy. Further, Oceans Policy (1999) outlines the Commonwealth
government's intention to prepare regional marine plans. This includes Commonwealth waters adjacent to
Western Australia.
Planning strategies, schemes and decision-making should:
(i) Take account of the location of areas of significance for recreational and commercial fishing and
aquaculture, having regard to State, regional and local issues and characteristics. This should
include land based infrastructure that supports these industries.
(ii) Seek to avoid or minimise any adverse impacts, directly or indirectly, on areas of significance for
commercial and recreational fishing and aquaculture as a result of adjacent land use planning
decisions and actions.
5.9 Landscape
Western Australia has a diversity of high value landscapes and scenic areas, many of which are unique to
Australia. These range from the unmodified semi-arid and subtropical landscapes of the north and east of
the State to modified rural farming landscapes in the south-west, and encompass a diversity of natural
coastal landscapes, vast flat plains, mountain ridges and forested areas.
There is an increasing appreciation and valuing of natural landscapes by the community. These
landscapes provide opportunities for recreation and tourism and fulfil a psychological need in providing a
contrast to the urban environments in which the majority of Australians live.
It is recognised that landscapes change in response to demands for primary products, recreation and
tourism as well as for rural living. Furthermore, the values of the community with regard to landscapes
also change over time. Accordingly, as the State grows, it will be increasingly important to ensure that
those landscapes that are valued by the community are protected. To do this it is necessary to identify the
landscape types and features requiring special attention, and to develop appropriate management and
planning policies that can positively contribute to their maintenance and enhancement.
Planning strategies, schemes and decision-making should:
(i) Identify and safeguard landscapes with high geological, geomorphological or ecological values,
as well as those of aesthetic, cultural or historical value to the community, and encourage the
restoration of those that are degraded.
(ii) In areas identified in 5.9(i) above, consider the level or capacity of the landscape to absorb new
activities and incorporate appropriate planning and building design and siting criteria to ensure
that new development is consistent and sensitive to the character and quality of the landscape.
(iii) Consider the need for a landscape, cultural or visual impact assessment for land use or
development proposals that may have a significant impact on sensitive landscapes.
5.10 Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Energy Efficiency
There is widespread awareness of the need to increase the efficiency with which energy is used in Western
Australia, including the need to reduce our reliance on energy produced from non-renewable resources
such as fossil fuels. The primary objective is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by means including (but
not limited to) increasing energy efficiency, decreasing reliance on non-renewable fuels, and increasing
usage of renewable energy sources.
The most recent National State of the Environment report recognises that Australians have a high per
capita level of greenhouse emissions by world standards, increasing by 16.9% between 1990 and 1998.
Guided by the National Greenhouse Strategy (1998), the draft State Sustainability Strategy (2002), and
the State greenhouse strategy currently being developed, planning can contribute to reducing the use of
energy by the community through the design of urban settlements, promoting the use of alternative fuels
and encouraging landscaping to provide energy efficient microclimates. Planning can also contribute to
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions by reducing car dependency and encouraging the retention of
vegetation and promoting revegetation in land use and development proposals.
Planning strategies, schemes and decision making should:
(i) Promote energy efficient development and urban design incorporating such issues as energy
efficient building design, walkable neighbourhoods, higher densities in areas accessible to high
quality public transport, local access to employment, retail and community facilities, and
orientation of building lots for solar efficiency.
Environment and Natural Resources Policy

10 June 2003 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2056
(ii) Support the retention of existing vegetation and revegetation in subdivision and development
proposals.
(iii) Support the use of alternative energy generation, including renewable energy, where appropriate.
(iv) Support the adoption of adaptation measures that may be required to respond to climate change.
6. IMPLEMENTATION
The purpose of this policy is to inform local governments and the Town Planning Appeals Tribunal of
those aspects of State-level planning policy concerning the environment and natural resources which
should be taken into account in planning decision-making, while acknowledging the inherent difficulties
of balancing conflicting needs. The policy will also guide the WAPC in undertaking its planning
responsibilities and, where appropriate, in integrating and co-ordinating the activities of the many State
agencies that influence the use and development of land as well as the management and protection of
natural resources.
Measures for implementing the policy are many and varied. Primarily, implementation will be through the
preparation of strategic plans, regional and local statutory schemes, conservation and management
strategies, and other relevant plans to achieve the objectives of the policy. Implementation will also occur
through the day to day process of decision-making on subdivision and development applications, and the
actions of other State agencies in carrying out their responsibilities. Local governments and State
agencies will need to take account of these policy measures to ensure integrated decision-making and in
the planning and management of the environment and natural resources.
The State Government will support local governments where appropriate in the preparation of policies and
plans, and to address the issues raised within this Policy. This may include the provision of data and
relevant information to assist local governments in the preparation of their town planning schemes and
plans, and in making other planning decisions.
7. REFERENCES
Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council (1994) National Water Quality
Management Strategy Canberra, AGPS
Australian Greenhouse Office (1998) National Greenhouse Strategy, Canberra, AGPS
Australian State of the Environment Committee (2001) Australia state of the environment, Canberra,
AGPS
Commonwealth Government of Australia (1999) Oceans Policy, Canberra, AGPS
Department of Conservation and Land Management (1997) Wetlands Conservation Policy for Western
Australia Como, WA
Department of Environmental Protection (2000) Perth Air Quality Management Plan, Perth, WA
Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories (1996) National Strategy for the Conservation of
Australia’s Biological Diversity, Canberra, AGPS
Department of Environmental Protection (1998) Environment Western Australia 1998: State of the
Environment Report, Perth WA
Department of Fisheries (2002) State of the Fisheries Report 2000-2001, Perth WA
Ecologically Sustainable Development Steering Committee (1992) National Strategy for Ecologically
Sustainable Development, Canberra, AGPS
Government of Western Australia (2002) Focus on the future: The Western Australian State Sustainability
Strategy, Consultation Draft, September 2002
Government of Western Australia (2002) Government Response to the Salinity Taskforce Report: Salinity:
a new balance June 2002
Government of Western Australia (2002) Statement of Planning Policy No. 11: Agricultural and Rural
Land Use Planning Policy, State Law Publisher, Perth, WA
Government of Western Australia (2000) Statement of Planning Policy No. 10: Basic Raw Materials,
State Law Publisher, Perth, WA
Government of Western Australia (2000) Statement of Planning Policy No. 8: State Planning Framework
Policy, State Law Publisher, Perth, WA
Government of Western Australia (1999) Western Australian Government Framework to Assist in
Achieving Sustainable Natural Resource Management in Western Australia , Perth, WA
Government of Western Australia (1997) Statement of Planning Policy No. 4: State Industrial Buffer
Policy, State Law Publisher, Perth, WA
Government of Western Australia (1992) Environmental Protection (Kwinana) (Atmospheric Waste)
Policy State Law Publisher, Perth, WA
Government of Western Australia (1992) Environmental Protection (Goldfields residential areas)(sulphur
dioxide) Policy State Law Publisher, Perth, WA
Environment and Natural Resources Policy

10 June 2003 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2057
National Environment Protection Council (Australia) (1998) National Environment Protection Measure
for Ambient Air Quality, Adelaide, SA
Salinity Taskforce (2001) Salinity : a new balance : the report of the Salinity Taskforce established to
review salinity management in Western Australia Perth, WA
Water and Rivers Commission, (2001) State water quality management strategy, East Perth, WA
Western Australian Planning Commission (1997) State Planning Strategy, Perth, WA
Main Roads Western Australia (1998) State Gravel Supply Strategy, Perth, WA
Department of Resources Development (2001) Towards a State Lime Strategy, draft Perth, WA
Environment and Natural Resources Policy