!200700112GG!
WESTERN
2475
AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT
ISSN 1448-949X PRINT POST APPROVED PP665002/00041
PERTH, TUESDAY, 29 MAY 2007 No. 112
SPECIAL
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY JOHN A. STRIJK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER AT 3.15 PM
© STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN PLANNING
COMMISSION
STATE PLANNING POLICY 3.5
HISTORIC HERITAGE CONSERVATION
Prepared under Part 3 of the
Planning and Development Act 2005
by the Western Australian Planning Commission



29 May 2007 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2477
CONTENTS
1. CITATION
2. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
3. APPLICATION OF POLICY
4. OBJECTIVES
5. THE STATUTORY FRAMEWORK
6. POLICY MEASURES
6.1 Identification and assessment
6.2 Designation of heritage areas
6.3 The difference between heritage areas and urban character areas
6.4 Establishment of heritage lists
6.5 Relevant considerations for development assessment
6.6 Development control principles
6.7 Planning schemes and strategies
7. IMPLEMENTATION
State Planning Policy: Historic Heritage Conservation



29 May 2007 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2479
1 CITATION
This is a State Planning Policy made under part 3 of the Planning and Development Act 2005.
This policy may be cited as State Planning Policy 3.5 Historic Heritage Conservation.
2 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
This policy sets out the principles of sound and responsible planning for the conservation and
protection of Western Australia’s historic heritage.
Aboriginal heritage is protected by the Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972. This policy does not
apply to the conservation of Aboriginal heritage except in cases where Aboriginal heritage
places or areas are entered in the state register, a local heritage list or are located within a
designated area.
The conservation of natural heritage is protected by other Acts. This policy does not apply to
the conservation of natural heritage except in cases where natural heritage forms part of a
place of historic cultural heritage significance.
This policy applies principally to historic cultural heritage including heritage areas, buildings
and structures, historic cemeteries and gardens, man-made landscapes and historic or
archeological sites with or without built features, such as Cape Inscription at Dirk Hartog
Island. This policy applies to places and areas of significance at both State and local level.
Western Australia has a rich historic heritage that is a significant asset for the State. The
protection and management of that heritage is important to our social, environmental and
economic prosperity.
Heritage supports urban and rural amenity by providing familiarity and the presence of
landmarks, by underpinning our ‘sense of place’, and by enhancing the quality of our built
environment generally.
Heritage conservation can aid economic prosperity by contributing to the attractiveness of the
living and working environment, and encouraging investment in a locality or region from
homeowners, investors and tourists. The avoidable loss of buildings through demolition and
neglect is a waste of economic as well as environmental resources.
As set out in the State Sustainability Strategy, heritage conservation and sustainable
economic development should be seen as complementary rather than conflicting objectives.
Most heritage places can be put to good economic use for commercial, residential or other
purposes. Adaptation of buildings for new uses will often be the key to conservation of
heritage places that no longer serve their original function, and will often require imagination
and flexibility. Exercising effective controls over land use, density and plot ratios through
town planning schemes and other planning controls is an important practical way in which
the planning system can contribute to heritage conservation outcomes.
Tensions between those committed to retaining the best from the past, and those committed
to building the new or optimising property investments, are common to most modern
societies. The planning system provides one of the mechanisms by which those tensions can
be resolved.
Effectively conserving, using and managing State and local heritage assets, therefore,
requires a balanced, integrated and imaginative approach which properly takes into account
the views of landowners, the community, and State and local governments. The Historic
Heritage Conservation policy promotes and facilitates such an approach.
3 APPLICATION OF POLICY
The policy applies throughout Western Australia.
4 OBJECTIVES
The objectives of this policy are—
(cid:127) To conserve places and areas of historic heritage significance.
(cid:127) To ensure that development does not adversely affect the significance of heritage places
and areas.
(cid:127) To ensure that heritage significance at both the State and local levels is given due
weight in planning decision-making.
(cid:127) To provide improved certainty to landowners and the community about the planning
processes for heritage identification, conservation and protection.
5 THE STATUTORY FRAMEWORK
The identification, conservation and protection of places and areas of State heritage
significance are provided for in the Heritage of Western Australia Act 1990. The Act provides
for the compilation of the state heritage register by the Heritage Council and Heritage
Minister.
Any development to a state-registered place requires approval from the responsible planning
authority, usually the Western Australian Planning Commission (WAPC) or a local
government, on the advice of the Heritage Council.
The identification of places and areas of local heritage significance is provided for in the
Heritage of Western Australia Act 1990, which requires all local governments to identify
heritage places in local government inventories (formerly ‘municipal inventories’).
State Planning Policy: Historic Heritage Conservation

2480 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 29 May 2007
The conservation and protection of places and areas of local heritage significance is provided
for in the Planning and Development Act 2005, which enables local governments to protect
heritage places and objects in local planning schemes.
Model provisions for local heritage are set out in the Model Scheme Text contained in the
Town Planning Amendment Regulations 1999. All new schemes or amendments prepared
since gazettal of the Model Scheme Text are required to conform to the model provisions,
including those for heritage. Schemes that predate the Model Scheme Text may contain
heritage provisions that vary from the standard model.
The Model Scheme Text provides that the normal permitted development rights do not apply
in respect of a place entered in a heritage list, or located in a heritage area. This means that
planning approval is required for the demolition of, or in specific circumstances internal
alterations to, a place entered in a heritage list or in the state register. Planning approval is
also required for the demolition of any building, or the erection or extension of a single house
within a heritage area.
Also, additional information may be required by a local government to accompany
applications that relate to a place entered in a heritage list or located within a heritage area.
The additional information may include street elevations, details of building materials and
other finishes, and details of adjacent buildings. The effect of a proposal on a heritage place or
heritage area becomes a relevant matter to be considered by a local government in
considering an application for planning approval.
6 POLICY MEASURES
6.1 Identification and assessment
The Heritage Council is responsible for the identification, assessment and registration of
places of State significance.
Local governments should identify places of local significance through the compilation and
review of local government inventories, in accordance with assessment criteria and other
relevant guidelines published by the Heritage Council. The local government inventory is a
survey that may be used to identify places for inclusion in heritage areas and a heritage list
under the local planning scheme. The inventory does not have statutory force and effect in
terms of planning controls.
6.2 Designation of heritage areas
Heritage areas are designated under local town planning schemes.
A heritage area should always be designated on the basis of a clear statement of significance,
and a clear identification of the significant physical fabric in the area. This information may
be provided within a local government inventory or in other supporting assessment
documentation.
In designating a heritage area, the local government is required to adopt a local planning
policy that sets out the objectives and guidelines for conserving the significant heritage fabric
of the area.
6.3 The difference between heritage areas and urban character areas
It is important to distinguish between “historic heritage significance” and “urban or
neighbourhood character”. Not all areas of urban or neighbourhood character have a level of
historic heritage significance which warrants protection.
Urban character is essentially identified by built form and age, topography, open space,
streetscape, land use and activity, and all areas exhibit some form of urban character.
However planning controls in urban character areas do not necessarily require restrictions on
demolition or building design.
6.4 Establishment of heritage lists
A heritage list established pursuant to a local planning scheme should be compiled having
regard to the places identified in the inventory. A local government may elect to include all of
those places in its heritage list, or may include a smaller sub-set of places.
The standard procedures for the compilation of a heritage list are set out in the Model
Scheme Text.
The inclusion or exclusion of places from a heritage list should be based on their degree of
historic heritage significance, supported by the findings in the inventory, irrespective of
whether they are privately or publicly owned.
6.5 Relevant considerations for development assessment
The Model Scheme Text provisions require local governments in considering applications for
planning approval to have regard, amongst other things, to—
(cid:127) The conservation and protection of any place or area that has been registered in the
register of heritage places under the Heritage Act or is the subject of a conservation
order under the Act, or which is included in the heritage list under clause 7.1 of the
scheme, or which is designated as a heritage area under clause 7.2 of the scheme.
(cid:127) Whether the proposed development will adversely affect the significance of any
heritage place or area, including any adverse effect resulting from the location, bulk,
form or appearance of the proposed development.
State Planning Policy: Historic Heritage Conservation

29 May 2007 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2481
In addition to these broad considerations, local governments should also have regard to the
following specific matters.
Alterations, extensions, change of use or demolition affecting a heritage place
(including a place within a heritage area)
(cid:127) The level of heritage significance of the place, based on a relevant heritage assessment.
(cid:127) Measures proposed to conserve the heritage significance of the place and its setting.
(cid:127) The structural condition of the place, and whether the place is reasonably capable of
conservation.
(cid:127) Whether the place is capable of adaptation to a new use which will enable its retention
and conservation.
Development within a heritage area
(cid:127) Whether the proposed development responds sympathetically to the heritage values of
the area as a whole and that part of the heritage area in the vicinity of the proposed
development.
(cid:127) Whether the siting, scale, style and form, materials and finishes of the proposed
development responds sympathetically to the heritage values of the area.
(cid:127) The local planning policy for the heritage area including any places designated of
heritage significance and the objectives and guidelines for conservation and
enhancement of the heritage area.
6.6 Development control principles
The following development control principles should be applied in considering planning
applications in relation to a place entered in a heritage list, a place or area entered in the
state register, or a heritage area designated pursuant to a local planning scheme.
The weight given to heritage as a consideration will vary, depending on the degree of
significance of a place or area, and relevant economic, social or environmental factors that
may apply.
Alterations, extensions or change of use affecting a heritage place
(cid:127) Development should conserve and protect the cultural significance of a heritage place
based on respect for the existing building or structure, and should involve the least
possible change to the significant fabric.
(cid:127) Alterations and additions to a heritage place should not detract from its significance
and should be compatible with the siting, scale, architectural style and form, materials
and external finishes of the place. Compatibility requires additions or alterations to sit
well with the original fabric rather than simply copying or mimicking it.
(cid:127) In some cases, the conservation and protection of a heritage place may require a change
of use to ensure a reasonable beneficial use or return. Sympathetic adaptation and
change of use should be supported in such cases.
(cid:127) Development should be in accordance with any local planning policies relating to
heritage.
Demolition of a heritage place (including a place within a heritage area)
(cid:127) Demolition of a State heritage place is rarely appropriate and should require the
strongest justification. Demolition of a local heritage place should be avoided wherever
possible, although there will be circumstances where demolition is justified. The onus
rests with the applicant to provide a clear justification for it.
(cid:127) Demolition approval should not be expected simply because redevelopment is a more
attractive economic proposition, or because a building has been neglected.
Consideration of a demolition proposal should be based upon the significance of the
building or place; the feasibility of restoring or adapting it, or incorporating it into new
development; the extent to which the community would benefit from the proposed
redevelopment; and any local planning policies relating to the demolition of heritage
places.
Development within a heritage area
(cid:127) Development within a heritage area should respect and complement the heritage
significance of the area as identified in the local planning policy. A respectful design
approach gives special consideration to the siting, scale, architectural style and form,
materials and finishes of the proposed development in relation to its neighbours,
without copying historic detailing or decoration.
(cid:127) Alterations and additions to existing buildings should be designed and sited in a
manner that respects and complements the heritage significance of the area.
(cid:127) A general presumption should apply in favour of retaining buildings that make a
positive contribution to the significance of the area.
(cid:127) Approval for demolition, if granted, may be accompanied by a requirement for an
acceptable redevelopment proposal to avoid gap sites. If redevelopment is likely to be
delayed, consideration should be given to the interim use of the land including a
State Planning Policy: Historic Heritage Conservation

2482 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 29 May 2007
requirement for sympathetic treatment such as facade retention, landscaping or
boundary treatment.
(cid:127) Any new buildings erected in heritage areas should be designed and sited in a way that
respects and complements the heritage significance of the area. New construction that
is imaginative, well designed and harmonious should not be discouraged.
6.7 Planning schemes and strategies
The WAPC and local governments should have regard to heritage places and areas in
formulating planning schemes and strategies. Care should be taken to minimise the extent to
which land use zoning and other planning controls conflict with, or undermine, heritage
conservation objectives.
Effective heritage protection requires an integrated approach involving not only regulation,
but also promotion and incentives.
The Model Scheme Text provides for flexibility in the application of planning controls to
realise positive heritage outcomes while also helping meet the expectations and aspirations of
property owners. Incentives may include the relaxation of planning requirements in relation
to land use, density, plot ratio, car parking or other works.
7 IMPLEMENTATION
This policy deals with those aspects of heritage that interact most directly with the planning
system. The policy advocates a positive approach, and emphasises the importance of
reconciling heritage protection with property owners’ expectations and the demand for new
development opportunities.
The State Government has a role in support of this policy through—
(cid:127) establishment of the State heritage register
(cid:127) giving advice, support and information to local government in relation to heritage
surveys, planning schemes and other conservation matters
(cid:127) sound heritage management of public buildings by State government agencies
(cid:127) ensuring that due regard is given to heritage significance in development assessment,
planning schemes and planning strategies.
Local government has a role in support of the policy through—
(cid:127) ensuring that heritage provisions in local planning schemes are consistent with the
Model Scheme Text
(cid:127) ensuring that heritage places and areas are carefully identified consistent with the
common standards provided by the Heritage Council
(cid:127) ensuring that due regard is given to heritage significance in development assessment,
planning schemes and planning strategies
(cid:127) adopting local planning policies affecting places entered in heritage lists.
———————————
State Planning Policy: Historic Heritage Conservation