Department of Planning,
Lands and Heritage
State Planning Policy 3.6
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021

click to follow
1 CITATION 1 6.11 Infrastructure
contributions not to be
imposed as a condition
2 BACKGROUND 1
of rezoning 13
6.12 Transitional
3 POLICY INTENT 1 arrangements 13
Disclaimer
6.13 Implementation 13
This document has been produced by the
Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage 4 APPLICATION OF THE
on behalf of the Western Australian Planning POLICY 2 7 REVIEW OF POLICY 14
Commission. Any representation, statement,
opinion or advice expressed or implied in this
publication is made in good faith and on the 5 POLICY OBJECTIVES 3 8 DEFINITIONS/
basis that the Government, its employees and INTERPRETATIONS 14
agents are not liable for any damage or loss
whatsoever which may occur as a result of 6 POLICY MEASURES 3
action taken or not taken, as the case may be, SCHEDULES
in respect of any representation, statement, 6.1 Principles underlying
opinion or advice referred to herein. infrastructure Schedule 1 –
Professional advice should be obtained before contributions 3 Development Infrastructure:
applying the information contained in this Standard Infrastructure
6.2 Types of infrastructure 3
document to particular circumstances.
Contribution Requirements 15
6.3 Scope 3
Schedule 2 –
6.4 Where infrastructure
Community Infrastructure:
contributions can be
© State of Western Australian Items for inclusion in a
sought 4
Development Contribution
Published by the
Western Australian Planning Commission 6.5 Form of infrastructure Plan 18
Gordon Stephenson House contributions 4 Schedule 3 –
140 William Street 6.6 Variable and maximum Development Contribution
Perth WA 6000
costs levied 4 Plan Template 19
Locked Bag 2506 6.7 Imposition of Schedule 4 –
Perth WA 6001
infrastructure Development Contribution
Published April 2021 contributions 5 Plan – Required Information 22
website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au 6.8 Subdivision and Schedule 5 –
email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au development 5 Annual Report Template 24
tel: 08 6551 8002 6.9 Developer Agreements 5
fax: 08 6551 9001 6.10 Development
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
Contribution Plans 5
This document is available in alternative
formats on application to Communication
Services.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
1
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
1 CITATION 2 BACKGROUND 3 POLICY INTENT
This State Planning Policy is prepared under Part Three of In Western Australia, contributions for infrastructure The careful planning and coordination of infrastructure
the Planning and Development Act 2005. It may be cited as through a State Planning Policy were first established in is fundamental to the economic and social well-being of
State Planning Policy 3.6 Infrastructure Contributions (SPP 2009. They are collected by local governments or service any community. New development and redevelopment
3.6). providers towards the cost of infrastructure necessary to needs to ensure the cost-efficient, and appropriately-
accommodate urban growth. timed provision of infrastructure and facilities such as
roads, public transport, water supply, sewerage, electricity,
Contributions are levied directly through the subdivision
gas, telecommunications, drainage, open space, schools,
and development process, or where there are multiple
health, community and recreation facilities.
landowners, through Development Contribution Plans
(DCPs). The provision of essential infrastructure influences the
standard of living, mobility and lifestyle choices of a
Infrastructure contributions are one of a number of ways
community and underpins the ability to achieve compact,
used to meet the physical and social infrastructure needs
connected and consolidated urban growth.
of growing urban communities. Other funding streams
should also be considered to coordinate and deliver the The delivery of cost-efficient and appropriately-timed
full suite of necessary infrastructure. infrastructure requires a co-ordinated commitment from
State and local government, in partnership with the
The policy is supplemented by the Infrastructure
private sector.
Contributions Guidelines that provide additional
explanatory information regarding the application and The use of this policy does not prevent seeking additional
implementation of this policy. State and Federal funding, to reduce costs and maintain
housing affordability.
The purpose of this policy is to set out the principles
and requirements that apply to the establishment and
collection of infrastructure contributions in new and
established areas. The policy also provides the framework
to facilitate the coordination and delivery of infrastructure
in greenfield locations, infill locations, activity centres,
corridors and high-frequency public transport routes,
industrial nodes and station precincts, where there is
demand for additional services and facilities.
The key principle in the application of infrastructure
contributions is that the ‘beneficiary’ pays. Sometimes
benefits will be largely confined to the owners of new

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
2
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
development. Sometimes, the benefits will accrue to 4 APPLICATION OF THE POLICY Alternative approaches to the funding and delivery of
owners of both existing and new development. infrastructure should ensure that the allocation of costs
Costs are apportioned proportional to the need for the The policy applies throughout Western Australia across all is transparent, equitable and accountable, and subject
infrastructure and facilities, and the demand generated development settings where new development results to consultation with the community prior to being
by the development. in a demand for additional infrastructure, services and implemented.
facilities.
This policy provides the framework to ensure that the Where the local government seeks to use alternative
infrastructure contributions system is transparent, This may include new communities in greenfield approaches, it is recommended that early consultation
equitable, and accountable and provides for efficient locations; existing urban areas; industrial areas; and occur with the Department of Planning, Lands and
dispute resolution at critical junctures in the process to regional towns, where the principles outlined in the policy Heritage.
ensure effective administration of the system. can be upheld.
The application of mechanisms outlined in this policy,
such as Development Contribution Plans (DCPs), may
not be suitable for all development settings, where the
rate of development may result in difficulties to realise
the intended infrastructure within the life of the DCP,
and principles such as certainty, and need and nexus are
difficult to establish.
Infill development and regional areas experiencing
slow growth rates are examples where the use of such
mechanisms need to be considered with a degree of
caution.
Alternative approaches and mechanisms for funding
may need to be considered to ensure the timely and
coordinated redevelopment of an area, especially where
the early of delivery of infrastructure is essential.
Alternative approaches may include:
• incentive and performance-based provisions in local
planning frameworks that are linked to the delivery of
broader community benefits, including infrastructure
and public realm upgrades or
• use of rating mechanisms available under the Local
Government Act 1995.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
3
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
5 POLICY OBJECTIVES 6 POLICY MEASURES h) Right of consultation and review: Land owners
and developers have the right to be consulted on
The objectives of this policy are: 6.1 Principles underlying infrastructure the manner in which development contributions are
contributions determined, and the opportunity to seek a review by
• to facilitate the efficient and effective provision of
an independent third party regarding the calculation
infrastructure and facilities that are essential to meet
Contributions for all infrastructure must be levied in of costs, and return of funds.
the demands arising from population growth and
accordance with the following principles:
development
a) Need and the nexus: The need for the infrastructure 6.2 Types of Infrastructure
• to provide a system for the coordinated delivery of
must be clearly demonstrated (need) and the
infrastructure necessary to facilitate new urban growth
connection between the development and the Infrastructure is fundamental to the economic and social
opportunities to achieve compact, consolidated towns
demand created should be clearly established wellbeing of any community. For the purposes of this
and cities
(nexus). policy, essential infrastructure includes:
• to provide clarity on the acceptable methods
b) Transparency: Both the method for calculating the a) Development Infrastructure – infrastructure
of collecting and coordinating contributions for
infrastructure contribution and the manner in which it required to facilitate development and to support the
infrastructure
is applied should be clear, transparent, and simple to orderly development or redevelopment of an area.
• to establish a system for apportioning, collecting understand and administer. b) Community Infrastructure – infrastructure required
and spending contributions for infrastructure that is
c) Equity: Infrastructure contributions should be levied for communities and neighbourhoods to function
transparent, equitable, accountable and consistent
equitably from identified stakeholders within a effectively.
and
contribution area, based on the relative contribution
• to guide an efficient dispute resolution and arbitration to need. 6.3 Scope
process.
d) Certainty: The scope, timing, and priority for
Infrastructure contributions can be sought for the
delivering infrastructure items, and the cost of
following types of infrastructure:
infrastructure contributions and methods of
a) Development Infrastructure: may be imposed
accounting for escalation, should be clearly identified.
through the subdivision and development process
e) Efficiency: Contribution should be justified on
without the need for a DCP.
a whole-of-life capital cost basis consistent with
Items are listed in Schedule 1: Development
maintaining financial discipline on service providers
Infrastructure - Standard Infrastructure Contribution
by precluding the over-recovery of costs.
Requirements. Standard Infrastructure items may be
f) Consistency: The system for infrastructure
included in a DCP when cost-sharing arrangements
contributions for apportioning, collecting and
are proposed, unless other existing mechanisms and
spending contributions should be consistent, efficient
process are in place for collection of contributions for
and transparent.
infrastructure such as primary schools.
g) Accountable: That there is accountability in the
manner in which infrastructure contributions are
determined, collected and expended.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
4
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
b) Community Infrastructure: items that may be The contributions are for the initial capital requirements b) For Community Infrastructure – a maximum levy
considered for inclusion in a DCP are listed in Schedule only and not for ongoing maintenance or operating costs for infrastructure of $5,000 per dwelling shall apply
2: Community Infrastructure: Items for inclusion in a of the infrastructure, beyond that required of developers for local governments seeking contributions for the
Development Contribution Plan. through the subdivision and development process. capital cost of community infrastructure, subject
to the support of the Western Australian Planning
6.4 Where infrastructure contributions Commission (WAPC).
6.5 Form of infrastructure contributions
can be sought
Contributions cannot exceed the maximum amount
Infrastructure contributions can be satisfied by one or any
and all items are to be justified, with the demand for
Contributions can be sought from developers and combination of the following methods:
infrastructure demonstrated through a Community
landowners for infrastructure items to support the orderly
• ceding land for roads, public open space, primary Infrastructure Plan (CIP). Local governments will
development of an area to cater to additional demand
school sites, drainage and/or other reserves be required to set priorities, following consultation
from increased population; to facilitate development and
• constructing infrastructure works to be transferred to with the community, on the delivery of Community
redevelopment of areas identified in strategic planning
a relevant Government agency on completion (in-kind Infrastructure.
instruments for consolidated urban growth; or to
contributions)
accommodate and facilitate industrial growth: It is expected that additional funding to deliver the
• monetary contributions, to be used by the local full range of required Community Infrastructure will
• a new item of infrastructure
government or Government agency or utility provider come from other sources including general local
• land for infrastructure to acquire land or undertake works (either directly government revenue, and State and Federal funding.
• an upgrade in the standard of provision of an existing through the subdivision and development process, or
The capped costs for Community Infrastructure is
item of infrastructure, to meet the additional demand through a DCP) or
to ensure there is a balance in the ability for local
in a defined catchment • some other method acceptable to the relevant
governments to deliver Community Infrastructure for
Government agency or infrastructure provider, or a
• an extension to an existing item of infrastructure to a growing population, while also limiting the impact
combination of the above.
avoid unnecessary duplication of facilities, to meet on housing affordability.
the additional demand of new residents in a defined
The capped costs should not be regarded as a target,
6.6 Variable and maximum costs levied
catchment
with contributions required through a community
• the total replacement of infrastructure once it has Costs levied are either variable or capped, depending on DCP to be justified, and the infrastructure able
reached the end of its economic life where it can be the type of infrastructure: to be delivered within defined timeframes.
demonstrated that new development has resulted in a) For Development Infrastructure – costs are Where possible, efforts should be made to obtain
additional demand and variable depending on the infrastructure alternative or additional funding sources.
requirements and location of the development
• other costs reasonably associated with the
area. Costs should be established based on industry
preparation, implementation and administration of
benchmarks for specifications at an appropriate
a DCP.
standard.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
5
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
6.7 Imposition of infrastructure • land contributions for public open space, foreshore 6.10 Development Contribution Plans
contributions reserves, primary schools and roads
• infrastructure works for essential services and roads 6.10.1 When a DCP is required
Contributions for infrastructure are generally calculated
• monetary contributions for standard servicing and Development Contribution Plans (DCPs) prescribe the
and applied via the following mechanisms:
utility charges or cost contributions for land owners in a development
a) Subdivision and development process –
• a combination of the above. contribution area for the provision of infrastructure to
consistent with the requirements of this policy and
service future growth.
Schedule 1 - Standard Infrastructure Contribution
6.9 Developer Agreements
requirements, contributions are levied through the Where cost-sharing arrangements are proposed
subdivision or development process and applied that cannot be implemented through alternative
Contributions may also be implemented in limited
directly via standard conditions of subdivision, strata arrangements, these can be supported by a DCP.
circumstances through Developer Agreements or by a
subdivision or development, or other methods
voluntary agreement between a landowner or developer Infrastructure items can be included in a DCP where
detailed in the local planning scheme.
and the relevant local government, pursuant to a request costs are to be equitably shared between landowners,
b) Development Contribution Plans – where cost- from the landowner or developer. based on the relative proportion of demand generated.
sharing arrangements are proposed to deliver Where applicable, a DCP should also reflect the sharing of
Circumstances include large-scale, single ownership
Development or Community Infrastructure consistent costs of infrastructure, detailing any contribution to the
projects with a long development timeframe, or in
with the requirements of this policy (refer Schedule 1 delivery of infrastructure made by the local government
regional areas where a formal DCP is not considered
for Standard Development Infrastructure contribution or service provider.
by local government and contributing owners to be
requirements; and Schedule 2: Community
necessary to achieve desired infrastructure delivery Infrastructure items included in a DCP should consider the
Infrastructure items).
outcomes. lifespan of the DCP, with the expectation that the item of
c) Developer Agreements − in limited circumstances,
infrastructure can be genuinely delivered consistent with
and pursuant to a request from the landowner or Notwithstanding that Developer Agreements do not
the timing and priorities established in the DCP.
developer. form part of a local planning scheme, infrastructure
contributions prepared under this arrangement should Infrastructure contributions can only be for the provision
6.8 Subdivision and development be consistent with the principles outlined in this policy of capital items, and costs associated with design and
and any decision to deviate from these principles, construction of infrastructure (including land costs).
Developers, or landowners, are required to make including the provision of facilities of a higher quality The costs of administration, and other requirements, such
contributions for new or upgraded infrastructure to or specification than standard, should be a voluntary as maintenance periods for public open space, required
support the orderly development of an area. These may decision by all parties to the agreement. by State Government policy are considered capital items
relate to the requirements of service providers, the State and may be included in a DCP.
Government or local government.
DCPs should not be considered the default instrument
Schedule 1 details the standard requirements for for funding of infrastructure and should be carefully
infrastructure contributions levied through the considered prior to commencement, and other
subdivision and development process. This includes: approaches for the coordinated delivery of infrastructure
should be explored.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
6
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
DCPs may not be suitable in established regional or • land excluded 6.10.3 Timing of DCPs to align with comprehensive
metropolitan areas due to the difficulties in establishing • procedures relating to the DCP Report and Cost planning
the need and nexus of additional infrastructure, or the Apportionment Schedule (CAS) Where a structure plan (Standard, Precinct or District
uncertainty around the rate of growth and certainty
• cost contributions based on estimates Structure Plan), or similar planning instrument, has been
regarding the timing of delivery of infrastructure.
prepared and cost-sharing arrangements are identified
• valuation of land
as being required to deliver infrastructure necessary for
6.10.2 Operative Scheme Provisions • liabilities and triggers for cost contributions
development, a DCP should be drafted at the earliest
• payments of a cost contribution
Where it has been determined that a DCP is required to opportunity, and advertised concurrently or within
implement cost-sharing arrangements, it is to be prepared • unpaid contributions 6 months following approval of the structure plan.
for a Development Contribution Area (DCA). This area is • administration of funds This is to ensure that the DCP has been prepared ahead
to be identified on the scheme map and within the text, • procedures for shortfall or excess at the end of a DCP of subdivision and development, and that all parties are
and incorporated into schemes via special control areas. aware of cost liabilities associated with the delivery of
• closure procedures
necessary infrastructure.
A DCP does not have effect until it is incorporated into • powers of the local government and Minister and
a local planning scheme. Prior to (or concurrent with) Consideration of structure plans by the local government
• arbitration and dispute resolution avenues.
identification of the first DCA within a local government and the WAPC should not be delayed where a local
area, and associated formulation of a DCP, operative Infrastructure costs and estimates are not to be government has not yet prepared a DCP.
scheme provisions must be included in the relevant incorporated into the local planning scheme, but shall
local planning scheme to provide the framework for be formulated and advertised with the scheme report, or 6.10.4 Requirements of a DCP
formulating and implementing a DCP, as provided in scheme amendment report, which introduces the DCP.
Development Contribution Plans are detailed in
the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
While development contributions can be calculated, they the Scheme and supported by a DCP Report and
Regulations 2015.
cannot be collected prior to gazettal of the plan, without associated CAS, and other supporting strategic and
Where a local government has advertised a development the agreement of the landowner. financial planning reports. In preparing a DCP, the local
contribution plan, and the submissions have been government is to ensure that:
Interim arrangements, such as Deed of Agreements,
considered by the local government and the amendment
should be agreed and implemented via conditions of a) there is a clear and sound basis with linkages to the
forwarded to the WAPC for final approval, land within
subdivision or development to contribute to the cost of local government’s strategic and financial planning
that DCA will be considered to be subject to the DCP.
providing community and/or development infrastructure. processes - infrastructure items must be included in
The WAPC will support the imposition of a condition
Further details regarding the recommended contents of a local government strategic community plan and
of subdivision or development requiring contributions
Deed of Agreements are provided in the supporting the capital works program
for the provisions of infrastructure consistent with the
guidelines and include:
b) the need for that infrastructure, based on an analysis
proposed DCP.
• a provisional cost contribution amount, mutually of the demand generated, and the nexus, and where
Provisions to be incorporated into local planning schemes agreeable to both parties the relationship between the need for infrastructure
relating to DCAs include the following: • the timing of reconciliation of final payment and and the new development is clearly established
• a sunset clause that defines the time period.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
7
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
c) that the DCP Report contains adequate justification The details of all items of infrastructure are to be detailed • primary schools – collection of contributions for
for the infrastructure and construction standards in the DCP in the scheme. primary school land is coordinated via the Department
identified in the DCP, and the authority responsible of Education
DCP infrastructure items are to be included in the local
for providing the infrastructure must be identified government strategic community plan and capital works • technical college (TAFE)/university - land acquired by
d) the costs of infrastructure must be transparent, program such that the timing of delivery aligns between relevant government agency or provider
appropriate and reviewed at least annually all documents. • non-government schools - land acquired by relevant
e) estimated costs of infrastructure should be based on or provider
Where a DCP is proposed, the scope of infrastructure
the recommended reference rates, or indices, detailed items should be clearly defined in the local planning • administration costs associated with office
in the policy and supporting guidelines, and relevant scheme, and should not be subject to change unless accommodation and facilities for staff undertaking
references or industry standards used in estimating adequate justification is provided, such as when an item DCP administration
costs are stated in the DCP Report
of infrastructure is no longer required. • marketing features (eg estate boundary walls or
f) there is a commitment to providing the infrastructure fencing, entry statements, public art, signage, artificial
The scope of items of infrastructure in a DCP should
in accordance with the timing and priorities outlined lake or waterway with no drainage function)
not be expanded to ensure the principle of certainty is
in the scheme; the DCP Report should include any
upheld, unless any changes have been included in an • regional sports grounds and facilities (regional open
scenarios under which this term may be extended or
amendment to the Scheme, and the required public space designated in Region Scheme) and
shortened
consultation has been undertaken. • local government offices.
g) commitments to funding, including external sources
of funding are detailed in the DCP Infrastructure items considered inappropriate for
6.10.6 Form and content of a DCP
inclusion in a DCP, where other funding mechanisms
h) the DCA to which the DCP applies must be
should be sought, or where other processes are in place The DCP template in Schedule 3 should be used and
appropriate and within an identified growth area or
to collect contributions, include: incorporated into the local planning scheme to ensure
location identified in a strategic planning document
consistency in the application of the development
and • infrastructure to be delivered by individual developers
contribution system across Western Australia, and to
i) cost-sharing arrangements between owners in the or landowners through subdivision and development
provide certainty for system users.
DCP area must be transparent, fair and reasonable. process, and which is not a shared cost in with other
landowners in the DCA Any departure from the model template will need to be
6.10.5 Scope of Items of Infrastructure in a DCP justified based on individual circumstances.
• wetland management (including any rehabilitation)
Infrastructure contributions can be sought for items – note that maintenance/ management costs The DCP is to include or specify the following:
of infrastructure where cost-sharing arrangements are may be included as required of developers by
a) the DCA to which the DCP applies including details of
proposed. local governments through the subdivision and
land or development to be excluded
development process
Acceptable items are listed in Schedule 1: Development b) the infrastructure and administrative items to be
• regional drainage
Infrastructure - Standard Infrastructure Contribution funded through the DCP
Requirements and Schedule 2: Community Infrastructure: • high school and other education facilities - land
c) details of funding, including the percentage being
Items for inclusion in a Development Contribution Plan. acquired by relevant government agency or provider
funded by the DCP, and the percentage from other
funding sources

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
8
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
d) the method and formula to be applied in determining Determining an appropriate lifespan should take into Administrative items may be included as a DCP item,
the cost contribution of each property owner in the consideration strategic and infrastructure planning, but they must relate directly to the work local
DCA (or unit of charge as determined in the DCP; the and financing cycles; reflect anticipated development government must do to prepare and implement the DCP.
unit of charge applied may vary for residential and growth rates; and provide certainty that the identified All administration items are to be individually itemised in
non-residential uses, and may include, but not limited infrastructure items can be delivered within the stipulated the DCP.
to, per dwelling; per lot, per hectare, or per square timeframe of the DCP.
Items that may be included are detailed in the Schedule
metre)
4 and may include: technical consultant fees for other
e) the priority, timing, staging and delivery of each item 6.10.7 Supporting Information studies, plans, reports, and project management
of infrastructure, including the party responsibility for Supporting information required to accompany a DCP is associated with the development of land if required to
delivery of infrastructure specified in Schedule 4. Templates for DCP Reports and inform the preparation of the DCP.
f) the term for which the DCP is to have effect the CAS are included in the guidelines for Infrastructure
g) the applicable review process for the DCP, the DCP Contributions. 6.10.9 Consultation requirements
Report, and infrastructure cost estimates, including
Prior to undertaking advertising and consultation as
the method to be used, indexing mechanisms for 6.10.8 Management and administration of a DCP
part of the statutory requirements for an amendment
credits accrued by a developer or property owner,
The local government is to establish and maintain an to the local planning scheme, early consultation on the
and land valuations and
interest-bearing reserve account that will operate as the proposed content of the DCP should be undertaken with
h) the policies, plans and other supporting documents Development Contribution Fund (DCF), in accordance relevant stakeholders, including key landowners in the
providing justification for the infrastructure items with the Local Government Act 1995 for each DCA, into DCA, providers of any infrastructure to be included in the
proposed for inclusion in the DCP. which cost contributions for that DCA will be credited, DCP, and State Government planning agencies.
and from which all payments for infrastructure and
The lifespan of a DCP should be linked to completion of To ensure the principles of transparency and equity
administrative items within that DCA will be made.
development or subdivision, and generally a maximum are maintained, the DCP Report is to be advertised
lifespan of 10 years applies. A lifespan of longer than 10 The purpose of the reserve account and the use of money concurrently with the Scheme Amendment Report to
years will only be considered in limited circumstances, in the reserve account must be limited to the application ensure that all parties are aware of their liabilities and
if justification for such a timeframe can be demonstrated of funds for the DCA. responsibilities. The DCP Report should include the CAS
and linked to a capital works and staging program. and other supporting documentation as required, that
Information on the interest earned on reserve accounts
provide details of the infrastructure costs and estimates,
For Community Infrastructure, a longer lifespan may be are to be made available to the public by the local
the priority and timing of the delivery of each item of
considered in limited circumstances to deliver city-wide government upon request, and any interest earned on
infrastructure, and other information necessary to justify
Community Infrastructure or specific strategic urban cost contributions credited to a reserve account should
the scope and contribution.
projects, which may have a longer delivery timeframe. be applied in the DCA to which the reserve account
While longer timeframes of up to 15 years may be relates.
considered, there must be a clear link to infrastructure
delivery, and there is certainty that the landowners
contributing to the community infrastructure will benefit
from the infrastructure delivered.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
9
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
6.10.10 Prioritisation of infrastructure in a DCP included in DCPs as the acquisition of land is a separate Contingencies should be reviewed through various
process undertaken by the Department of Education. phases of the life of the DCP, consistent with the principle
A DCP may identify infrastructure that:
Consideration will be given by the Department of that contingency amounts will reduce as detailed design
a) needs to be actioned with the first development in a
Education to requests from landowners for early costs and cost estimates become more certain.
DCA, such as a major road extension/connection and
acquisition of land in cases of hardship.
b) is predominantly located on an individual property 6.10.13 Disputes and right of review
Further information regarding the provision of school sites
owners’ land, such as construction of a recreation
is provided in the WAPC’s Operational Policy which guides Landowners and developers can seek a review of the
facility, or acquisition of public open space, to service
School Site Planning. calculation of costs, and the timing of return of funds.
the larger DCA.
It is preferable that disputes relating to cost contributions
6.10.11 Early acquisition of public purpose sites 6.10.12 Cost contributions based on estimates
are resolved by negotiation between the parties to the
The DCP should give priority to the acquisition of land The determination of infrastructure costs and dispute, determined by an independent third party.
for public purposes early in the development process, administrative costs is to be based on amounts expended,
However, it is acknowledged that this may not always be
to ensure that those landowners whose land has been but when expenditure has not occurred, it is to be based
possible and review by an independent decision-maker
identified for a public purpose (such as public open on the best and latest estimated costs available to the
may be required in some cases. This policy provides for
space) are not disadvantaged or unduly impacted by the local government and adjusted accordingly, if necessary.
the following pathways for the resolution of disputes.
rate of development. Sites for acquisition should be able
Where a cost apportionment schedule contains estimated
When a party subject to a development contribution
to be used for the purpose intended.
costs, such estimated costs are to be prepared and
objects to the amount of a cost contribution, that party
Consideration is to be given by the local government to reviewed at least annually by the local government.
may give notice to the local government within 28 days
requests from landowners for early acquisition of land
A local government is to provide available information after being informed of the cost contribution.
in cases of hardship, where land is identified for public
upon request to relevant stakeholders, including the DCP
Supporting evidence may be submitted within 42
purposes in the DCP area.
Report, the CAS, and supporting information such as
days after being informed of the cost contribution, and
The Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage (the valuation advice, calculations and methodology used to
prepared by a suitably qualified person detailing the basis
Department) may, in limited circumstances, pre-fund a determine the costs, or adjustment of costs.
of the objection, and include proposed alternative costs
DCP for the purposes of acquiring land in hardship cases,
Where a contribution has been paid based on estimated for consideration.
where the local government has provided evidence to
costs, this constitutes full and final discharge of the
A review of the objection is to be undertaken by an
the Department that it does not have funds to acquire
owner’s liability.
independent expert (a suitably qualified person agreed
the land. Once funds are available in the DCP fund, the
Consistent with industry standards, the estimated cost of by the local government and the owner), at the owner’s
Department will be reimbursed for the cost of acquiring
items of infrastructure may include project contingencies expense.
land with interest.
for design and construction:
In the case of primary school sites, early consultation with
Justification for proposed contingencies should be
the Department of Education is required through the local
provided in the DCP report. Recommended contingency
structure plan process to establish commitment to timing
percentages for the design and construction phases are
of purchase of the land. Primary school sites are not
provided in the supporting guidelines.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
10
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
If, following a review, the determination of the value of 6.10.14 Contribution credits – Principles of payment e) Where a developer, or land owner, has other land
the cost contribution is still not acceptable to the owner, and refund holdings in the development contribution area,
the value is to be determined: the credit is held by the local government until it is
Where a developer or landowner has pre-funded
a) by any method agreed between the local infrastructure within a DCA, land has been ceded to required to be used by the developer to offset future
government and the landowner or allow early infrastructure delivery, the landowner and the contributions.
b) if the local government and the owner cannot agree local government must negotiate a fair and reasonable f) Where a developer, or land owner, has no further
on a method, by arbitration in accordance with the outcome in relation to the credit. holdings in the DCA, the amount is held by the local
Commercial Arbitration Act 1985, with the costs to be government as a credit to the developer, or land
Appropriate negotiated outcomes include the following,
shared equally between the local government, on owner, until payments into the DCP fund are received
however, alternative arrangements may be made when
behalf of the DCP, and the owner. from subsequent developers to cover the credited
agreed between the two parties:
amount. The credit is then reimbursed to the
Alternatively, it is proposed to introduced provisions into
a) Where landowner has agreed, or been required developer, or land owner, as soon as circumstances
the Planning and Development Local Planning Scheme
to pre-fund an item of infrastructure, or to cede permit.
Regulations 2015 (LPS Regulations) which would provide
land early to allow early infrastructure delivery, this g) Where the DCP fund is in credit from developer, or
for an application for review being made to the State
pre-funding is to be held as a credit against future land owner, contributions already received, the credit
Administrative Tribunal for:
contributions, due from that owner. should be reimbursed as soon as circumstances
• the amount of the contribution required to satisfy
b) Pre-funding, the quantum of any credit, and the permit on completion of the works/ceding of land
a related condition of subdivision or development
timing of reimbursement to the landowner or and having regard to the priority and timing of DCP
approval and
developer are to be discussed and agreed between works.
• a decision of local government regarding the timing the developer and the local government prior to the h) Contribution credits applied as a result of a pre-
of return of a refund of a credit. commencement of any works related to the pre- funding arrangement for the cost of the infrastructure
Consideration of applications for review made under funded infrastructure. item are to be:
these proposed provisions would be guided by the c) Where a landowner has provided contributions via (i) as identified in the CEP and CAS and
content of this this policy and supporting provisions an interim arrangement, such as Deed of Agreement,
(ii) based on the infrastructure being constructed to
proposed to be included in the LPS Regulations. this contribution is to be held as a credit against
the same standard as was costed in the CEP.
future contributions due from that owner if the credit
These proposed changes respond to issues raised during i) The provision of infrastructure to a higher standard
has not been previously reconciled.
consultation on this policy. However, as stakeholders will require the relevant Government agency, or
d) Where a developer, or land owner, has pre-funded
have not had an opportunity to comment on the developer, or land owner, if on a voluntary basis, to
infrastructure, or ceded land early, the credit may be
proposed method to resolve these issues, any proposed meet the gap in costs.
used as security for interim payments until such time
amendment to the LPS Regulations will be subject to
j) If the actual amount of expenditure incurred when
as the DCP has been finalised.
additional consultation before implementation.
pre-funding an infrastructure item unexpectedly
varies significantly from that identified in the CEP and
CAS, the local government is to:

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
11
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
(i) establish why the variation exists and whether 6.10.15 Indexation If a local government considers, and can demonstrate,
such costs are justified and that the indexation isn’t keeping pace with the true costs
Indexing ensures cost contributions remain consistent
(ii) determine whether the CEP and CAS need to be with changing infrastructure costs. To achieve of a particular item, then the local government should
reviewed. consistency in the use of indexing across local revise the cost estimates for that component/item.
k) Where the review of the CEP and CAS results in a governments, the following indices are to be used, Indexation may be used in the annual review of cost
significant change per unit of charge, a formal review where appropriate, as reference rates for various DCP estimates and/or as applied to credits and is to be
of the DCP is required to ensure the principle of components including administration, development and detailed in the DCP. Indexation may be used for updating
equity is upheld. community infrastructure, and land: final cost contributions as required after gazettal of
l) The reimbursement of pre-funded works and early the DCP. The WAPC may support the use of alternative
ceding of land for acquisition through the DCP, Community Infrastructure indexing to those listed in this policy.
should be given priority according to timing that the • Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) Producer Price
infrastructure was delivered, as soon as adequate Index for Non-Residential Building Construction 6.10.16 Review of infrastructure cost estimates
funds have been collected in the DCP having regard • Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) Construction Work A review of infrastructure cost estimates should be
to the priority and timing of DCP works. Done, Australia undertaken at least annually.
m) Subject to the prior agreement of the local • WALGA Local Government Cost Index
An annual review may be undertaken by:
government, interest on loans and other borrowing (Non- Residential Building Construction).
i) applying the recommended Indexes detailed in this
costs directly associated with the pre-funded
infrastructure can be included in contribution credits. Development Infrastructure policy, or as published by the WAPC and/ or
n) Where a developer, or land owner, seeks to prefund • Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) Producer Price ii) reviewing each DCP component and undertaking a
works in advance to the priorities and scheduling Index for Road and Bridge Construction full review of cost estimates.
identified in the DCP, there should be a broader • Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) Engineering The method of the review of cost estimates should be
demonstrated benefit to the DCP for indexation to be Construction Activity detailed in the DCP.
applied to such works and applied to other owners’
• WALGA Local Government Cost Index
The review of cost estimates should be undertaken by a
liabilities within the DCP. Indexation of pre-funding
(Road and Bridge Construction)
suitably qualified professional.
works should be discussed with the local government
• other WA based construction cost indices agreed
and detailed in the DCP report. There may be circumstances where there is a substantial
between the parties.
o) Credits are only available for infrastructure items reduction in the cost contribution liability, due to factors
included as an item in a DCP, including land Land including an overestimation of contingencies and
acquisition. component costs, or an item of infrastructure is no longer
• Valuation advice from a licensed valuer
required. In such cases, including where a liability has
Indexing is to apply to contribution credits to incorporate
Credits been paid in full, the local government, on behalf of the
escalation. At the time the credit/liability is calculated,
DCP fund is to:
the index agreed between the parties should be used • as per relevant index as, detailed above or
until the liability is paid in full. • Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) - Cash Rate

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
12
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
(i) reconcile and adjust the liability for each unit of Any change to the proposed standards of infrastructure informing the status report is to be made available at the
charge, and refund excess monies to owners that paid and facilities; deletion of an item of infrastructure; request of the Department of Local Government, Sport
over the adjusted amount, as soon as circumstances or significant changes to the timing and priority of and Cultural Industries or the Department of Planning,
permit or delivery of infrastructure, after a DCP has been finalised Lands and Heritage, to enable the effective collection of
(ii) in cases where it is not reasonably practicable to and included in a local planning scheme, can only be information regarding the progress of all DCPs across the
identify owners and issue their entitled amount of incorporated in a DCP through an amendment to that state.
refund, any excess funds are to be held in the DCP scheme.
fund until all cost contributions have been made 6.10.19 Shortfall or excess in cost contribution
or accounted for and applied to the provision of 6.10.18 Monitoring and reporting at end of DCP
additional facilities or infrastructure improvements in
In addition to the annual review of cost estimates, At the end of a DCP, if there is a shortfall in the total
that DCA.
an annual status report is to be prepared by the local amount of cost contributions when all contributions have
In the event that an external funding source (State, government, providing an overview of progress of the been accounted for in a DCA, the local government may
Federal or other) is secured to fund infrastructure, the cost delivery of infrastructure specified in the DCP. make up the shortfall via other revenue sources; entering
contribution should be adjusted, or contributors to the into agreements with owners to fund the shortfall, if
The status report is to include:
DCF should be refunded. agreed by both parties; or fund the shortfall via loans or
• the timing and estimated percentage delivery of an
borrowings.
infrastructure item against that stated in the DCP,
6.10.17 Delivery of infrastructure
arising from review of the local government’s Capital If there is an excess in funding when all contributions
Identification of infrastructure as a contribution item in a Expenditure Plan have been accounted for in a DCA, the local government
gazetted DCP implies an agreement by local government • the financial position of the DCP, including interest is to:
to deliver that infrastructure, and should align with the that has been accrued and a) For DCPs delivering Community Infrastructure only,
local government’s long-term (10 year) financial plan. the local government should apply the excess
• a summary of the review of the estimated costs in the
funds to the provision of additional facilities or
While it is acknowledged that some level of flexibility in CAS, including any changes in funding and revenue
improvements in that DCA, following consultation
delivery timeframes is required to respond to the rate sources, and any relevant indexation.
with the community.
of development, it is important that local government
A model template for the annual report is provided in
adheres to the estimated delivery timeframes for The local government is to publish details of how the
Schedule 5. It is intended that the annual reporting
infrastructure for which development contributions have excess funds are intended to be spent in the DCA,
provide a snapshot, or high-level summary, of the
been made to ensure that the principles of equity and before the funds are expended.
progress of the DCP, to ensure the fundamental principles
accountability are upheld. Notwithstanding, the delivery b) For all other DCPs, the local government is to refund
of transparency and accountability are upheld throughout
of infrastructure can only occur with consideration of the the excess funds to the contributing landowners
the life of the DCP.
use of available funds. for that DCA. Prior to distribution of excess funds,
The annual status report is to be published by the local owners are to be advised in writing on the extent of
government on its website, and should align with the excess funds; how the excess funds are intended to
annual financial statements of local governments, be distributed; and the anticipated timing for return
published no later than six months after the end of the of excess funds.
financial year. Supporting documentation and data

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
13
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
There may be circumstances where it is not possible or Once the cost contribution is paid in full, if requested to • Any DCP (scheme amendment) that is being prepared,
practical to identify contributing owners. In such cases, do so by the owner of the land, the local government is to and has not been submitted to the WAPC on, or after
and after making all reasonable efforts to identify and withdraw the caveat at soon as circumstances permit the day of gazettal of this policy will be subject to the
contact the contributing owners, the local government is standards detailed in this policy.
to expend the excess funds to provide additional facilities
6.11 Infrastructure contributions not to be
or improvements in that DCA, following consultation with 6.13 Implementation
imposed as a condition of rezoning
the community.
Implementation of this policy will be primarily through
Local governments are not to impose infrastructure
The local government is to publish details of how the
statutory instruments including, structure plans, local
contributions beyond the scope of WAPC policy as
excess funds are intended to be spent in the DCA before
planning schemes or improvement schemes and the day-
conditions or prerequisites for rezoning. Infrastructure
the funds are expended
to-day consideration of scheme amendment, subdivision,
contributions must be formulated through an open and
strata subdivision and development proposals and
transparent process.
6.10.20 Closing a DCP
applications, together with the actions and advice of
Once all infrastructure and facilities identified in a DCP agencies in carrying out their responsibilities.
6.12 Transitional arrangements
have been delivered, the local government is required
to take the appropriate steps to close the DCP within 12
The following transitional arrangements apply to the
months, or as soon as practicable, having consideration
application of this policy:
for the policy provisions for a shortfall or excess funds in a
• Existing DCPs will continue to remain valid for the
DCP.
lifespan of the DCP. DCPs that do not have a lifespan
In circumstances where the delivery of remaining
or review period shall be amended no longer than
infrastructure is delayed by a small number of landowners
three (3) years after this policy comes into effect, to
unwilling or unable to develop their land, local
include the anticipated lifespan of the DCP and priority
governments should follow the options outlined in Clause
and timing for delivery of infrastructure.
6.9.19 to resolve the shortfall in funds, and where possible,
• Existing DCPs are to adhere to all monitoring and
deliver the remaining infrastructure.
reporting requirements of the LPS Regulations and
The amount of any cost contribution for which an owner SPP 3.6.
is liable, and has not paid, as a result of not developing
• DCPs that have been prepared prior to the gazettal of
their land is to be a charge on the owners’ land to which
this policy and having e been advertised, considered
the cost contribution relates, and the local government
by Council and submitted to the WAPC for approval,
may lodge a caveat, at the owner’s expense, against the
can be considered and assessed against SPP 3.6 (2009),
owner’s certificate of title to that land.
however, are to adhere to all operational, monitoring
The local government may withdraw the caveat to permit and reporting requirements of the LPS Regulations
a dealing, and then re-lodge the caveat, at the owner’s and this SPP 3.6.
expense to prevent further dealings.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
14
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
7 REVIEW OF POLICY 8 DEFINITIONS/
INTERPRETATIONS
This policy shall be reviewed within five (5) years of the
date that it is published in the Government Gazette. Unless otherwise defined within the relevant local
Capped costs for community infrastructure will be planning scheme, all definitions and interpretations
reconsidered at the time this policy is reviewed. relating to Infrastructure Contributions and DCPs, shall
be as defined in the Planning and Development (Local
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
15
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
SCHEDULES
SCHEDULE 1: DEVELOPMENT INFRASTRUCTURE – STANDARD INFRASTRUCTURE CONTRIBUTION
REQUIREMENTS
Infrastructure items that may be required as an infrastructure contribution in any development setting imposed through the subdivision
and development process, or contained within a Development Contribution Plan in cases where cost-sharing arrangements are proposed.
Where item of infrastructure in this Schedule is included in a DCP, monetary contribution is based on need and nexus.
ITEM STANDARD REQUIREMENT DELIVERY METHOD
Public purposes
Land for Public Open Public open space equivalent to 10% of the gross subdivisible area, or alternatively, a cash-in- Land
1 Space (Local and lieu contribution, in accordance with WAPC policies and the Planning and Development Act or
District) 2005.
monetary contribution
Basic Development – development of public open space consistent with the requirements
of Liveable Neighbourhoods or other built environment policy of the WAPC, including full
earthworks, basic reticulation, grassing of key areas, pathways that form part of the overall
pedestrian and/or cycle network, trees, drainage, lighting, basic seating, and maintenance for
two summers, and post water monitoring and establishment period of infrastructure such as
Construction of infrastructure
living streams where required by WAPC policy
Development of Public
2 or
Open Space Additional facilities for public open space may be provided at the discretion of the
landowner/developer and may include provision of basic playground equipment, water monetary contribution
fountains/ features, litter bins.
Upgrading of existing POS areas where comprehensive planning has been undertaken
and public realm upgrade requirements are set out in a Structure Plan, or similar planning
instrument.
Land (ceded free of cost to the State as per WAPC
3 Foreshore reserves Land for foreshore reserves on the coast, rivers and lakes in accordance with WAPC policies.
policy)
Foreshore reserve
Delivery by and at discretion of developer, or land
4 management plan and/ As part of development of public open space, including remediation works.
owner/relevant government agency
or upgrades

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
16
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
ITEM STANDARD REQUIREMENT DELIVERY METHOD
Wetlands are not suitable for inclusion in a DCP purely for environmental protection
purposes. Such land should provide a community recreation benefit to be considered Land (ceded free of cost to the State as per WAPC
for inclusion, and any valuation of the land should reflect the lack of development policy or as part of allowable 2% restricted public
potential resulting from its environmental constraints. open space, if useable for recreational purposes)
5 Wetlands
Inclusion in a DCP can only be for recreation purposes as part of the overall public open or
space network consistent with the provisions of Liveable Neighbourhoods. May include monetary contribution based on demonstrated
initial rehabilitation works and costs for maintenance/ management that are required of need/nexus
landowners/ developers through the subdivision and development process.
As per the relevant Operational Policy for school site
planning:
- land (ceded free of cost to the State) or
- pro-rata contribution by landowners via condition
6 Primary schools Land for government primary schools.
of subdivision.
Collection of contributions are coordinated through
the Department of Education via the subdivision and
development process and are not included in a DCP
Movement network
Land for primary distributor roads including primary regional roads and railway reserves only Delivery by relevant government agency
Primary distributor roads where justified by a new subdivision/ development i.e. in special circumstances where super- In most cases land for regional infrastructure such as
7
(proposed) lots are created on the urban fringe to allow for future subdivision. primary regional roads and railway reserves would be
In other circumstances, land to be acquired by appropriate authority. acquired by the appropriate authority
Where integrator arterials abut or are included within an area of subdivision or are required to
Land and Construction of infrastructure
connect to existing major roads outside the subdivision area but within the same landholding.
Integrator arterials or
8 Construction including earthworks for the whole road reserve, the construction of one
(proposed) monetary contribution based on infrastructure
carriageway comprised of two lanes and associated drainage works and shared paths or other
demand
works if shown in the structure plan, including intersection treatments where required.
Neighbourhood Land for neighbourhood connectors, access streets and laneways where required. All roads Land and Construction of infrastructure
connectors, access and traffic works required within a subdivision and linked to a constructed public road, or
9
streets and laneways including intersection treatments, and drainage. These roads provide access to individual lots monetary contribution based on infrastructure
(proposed) and allow utility services to be reticulated in the road reserves. demand
Land (ceded free of cost to the State as per WAPC
policy, or acquired by relevant government agency,
Where the proposal induces additional traffic movements and/ or benefits from it; and or
Existing roads or subject to injurious affection)
10 where development is a significant traffic generator.
(land for widening) or
In other circumstances, land to be acquired by appropriate authority.
monetary contribution based on infrastructure
demand.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
17
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
ITEM STANDARD REQUIREMENT DELIVERY METHOD
Where existing roads are inadequate to accommodate traffic generated by proposal; and or
Land and/or construction of infrastructure
where development is a significant traffic generator.
Existing roads or
11 Upgrading, construction and widening of existing roads and laneways, including intersection
(upgrades) monetary contribution based on infrastructure
treatment where required, to accommodate additional demand generated by a subdivision
demand
or development.
Required as part of items 8-11 - consistent with the requirements of Liveable Neighbourhoods Land and Construction of infrastructure
or other WAPC policies. May include signs and signals, street furniture, trees, landscaping,
Shared paths/cycle or
12 planting and associated streetscape and public realm upgrades including public transport
paths/footpaths/PAWs stops and shelters in accordance with approved Structure Plan, or similar planning monetary contribution based on infrastructure
instrument. demand
Land and/ or Construction of infrastructure
or
Grade separated and monetary contribution based on infrastructure
13 at grade pedestrian Only in limited circumstances where set out in Structure Plan for the area. demand
crossings
In most cases land for regional infrastructure such as
primary regional roads and railway reserves would be
acquired by the appropriate authority
Utilities and services
Infrastructure for –
• water
• sewerage
Land and Construction of infrastructure
• drainage works
or
• telecommunications
monetary contribution based on infrastructure
14 Utilities and Services • electricity supply infrastructure – initial provision and upgrades to existing services demand
This covers on-site works as well as off-site capital works such as major pump stations, trunk Note that works may be in addition to monetary
sewers or transmission lines that are necessary to, or contribute to, the subdivision and/or charges by licensed service providers for off-site
development, and the planning and implementation of urban water requirements. major infrastructure.
If an area is in fragmented ownership, where the infrastructure is not pre-funded by a state
government agency, monetary or in-kind contributions may be required in lieu of land or
infrastructure works with reimbursement for other owners where costs are shared.
Other
Other contributions as
15 provided for in WAPC As determined via WAPC policies As detailed in WAPC policies
policies

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
18
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
SCHEDULE 2: COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE: ITEMS FOR INCLUSION IN
A DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTION PLAN
Community infrastructure includes structures and facilities which help communities and neighbourhoods to function
effectively. Levying Community Infrastructure requires the preparation of a Development Contribution Plan.
Caps on the levying of contributions for Community Infrastructure apply per dwelling.
ITEM STANDARD REQUIREMENT DELIVERY METHOD
Land (in some circumstances as part of provision of public open space)
and Construction of infrastructure
Local sports, cultural
and recreation • Local sporting facilities such as tennis and bowling clubs, and cultural facilities. or
1
facilities (at local / • Includes car parking and landscaping. monetary contribution based on infrastructure demand
neighbourhood parks)
Note: Land for Public Open Space is a Standard Infrastructure Item under
Schedule 1
Land (in some circumstances as part of provision of public open space)
Multi-purpose district • Sports facilities – including, but not limited to grassed playing surfaces, multi-purpose hard and Construction of infrastructure
sports, cultural and surface outdoor courts, lighting and fencing.”
or
2 recreation facilities and/ • Buildings/pavilion - indoor sports facilities including toilets, change rooms, basic kiosk
monetary contribution based on infrastructure demand
or pavilion/building (at facilities
district open space) • Associated car parking and landscaping. Note: Land for Public Open Space is a Standard Infrastructure Item under
Schedule 1
Land (in some circumstances as part of provision of public open space)
Multi-purpose Includes meetings rooms, indoor recreation rooms, small scale flexible performance space, and Construction of infrastructure
3 Community building
kitchen facilities, toilets, car parking and landscaping or
and basic facilities
monetary contribution based on infrastructure demand
Library building, and Land (in some circumstances as part of provision of public open space)
other cultural facilities and Construction of infrastructure
4 Excluding specialist interior fit-out and technology
and buildings and basic or
facilities monetary contribution based on infrastructure demand
Land (in some circumstances as part of provision of public open space)
Child care/after school and Construction of infrastructure
5 centre buildings and Community-run centres only, excluding interior fit-out and technology
or
basic facilities
monetary contribution based on infrastructure demand
Requested by local government and approved by the WAPC, for which development
Other community
6 contributions may reasonably be requested, having regard to the objectives, scope and As determined by WAPC
services and facilities
provisions of this policy

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
19
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
SCHEDULE 3: DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTION PLAN TEMPLATE
Reference No. DCP X
Area name DCA XX
Relationship to other The development contribution plan generally conforms to strategic planning documents outlining the intended delivery
planning instruments of infrastructure including the local government’s Strategic Community Plan and the 10-year Financial Management Plan.
Example:
1. District community centre
• Single storey, xm2, plot ratio floor area building with x parking spaces situated on lot x, x street, x suburb
i. planning and design
ii. site acquisition
iii. earthworks and site (including servicing)
iv. construction of facility (including associated tender)
v. associated parking
Infrastructure and vi. associated landscaping
administrative Items to 2. Proportional costs of widening and upgrading of xx Road (x %) - including upgrading of existing carriageway,
be funded construction of one new carriageway, and associated drainage, lighting, landscaping etc
3. Cost of land and works for the realignment of xxx Road. Works are to include the cost of one carriageway,
earthworks, medium landscaping, drainage, lighting and paths
2. Administrative costs including:
i. costs to prepare and administer the plan during the period of operation (including legal expenses, valuation
fees, proportion of staff salaries, computer software or hardware for purpose of administering the plan)
ii. costs to prepare Annual Report and monitoring
iii. costs to prepare and review cost estimates and the cost apportionment schedule
iv. valuation costs

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
20
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
Reference No. DCP X
The contributions outlined in this plan have been based on the need for community infrastructure and/or non-community
infrastructure generated by additional development in the development contribution plan. The local government’s
Community Infrastructure Plan identifies the community infrastructure needs that impact on the development
contribution plan. The method for calculating contributions excludes the:
• demand for a facility that is generated by the current population
• demand created by external usage - the proportion of use drawn from outside of the main catchment area
• future usage – the proportion of usage that will be generated by future development outside of the development
Method for calculating contribution plan timeframe
contributions
C = [ID x CR] x I,
Where
C = Cost Contribution
ID = Infrastructure Demand – calculated using cost Apportionment Schedule CR = Contribution Rate - as set out in the
Cost Apportionment Schedule
I = Indexation factor.
Period of operation A DCP must specify the period of operation (X years).
(lifespan) Lifespan should be linked to completion of development or subdivision, and a maximum lifespan of 10 years
applies. A lifespan longer than 10 years will only be considered in limited circumstances, if justification for such a
timeframe can be demonstrated and linked to a capital works and staging program, and subject to the principle
of equity being upheld. A longer lifespan of up to 15 years may be considered in limited circumstances delivering
city-wide community infrastructure or specific strategic urban projects, which will have a longer delivery timeframe.
Selected timeframes are to correspond with any related strategic and infrastructure planning, and financing cycles;
reflects anticipated development growth rates; and provide certainty that the identified infrastructure items can be
delivered within the stipulated timeframe of the DCP.
Summary of the estimated timing and priority for the delivery of each item of infrastructure - details to align with the
Development Contribution Plan Report and the Council’s long-term strategic plan and infrastructure plan.
Timing and priorities
1-3 years
1. Upgrading of xx road
Timing and priority 4-7 years
2. Realignment of xx road (land acquisition)
8-10 years
3. Construction of District Community Centre
Note: In accordance with LPS Regulations (2015) the priority and timing of delivery of infrastructure should be
included in the Scheme. Further detail regarding delivery may be included in the accompanying DCP Report.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
21
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
Reference No. DCP X
Review process Example
(i) The plan will be reviewed five (5) years from the date of gazettal of the local planning scheme or amendment
to the local planning scheme to incorporate the plan, or earlier should the local government consider it
appropriate having regard to the rate of development in the area and the degree of development potential still
existing.
(ii) The estimated infrastructure costs shown in the cost apportionment schedule will be reviewed at least annually
to reflect changes in funding and revenue sources and indexed based on the Building Cost Index or other
appropriate index as approved by the qualified person undertaking the certification of costs.
Participants and
In accordance with the Cost Contribution Schedule adopted by the Local Government for DCA x
contributions
Reporting • Annual review of DCP
requirements • A status report (annual report) in the form consistent with the template in Schedule 5

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
22
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
SCHEDULE 4: DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTION PLANS – REQUIRED INFORMATION
SCHEDULE 4 – REQUIREMENTS AND CONTENT OF A DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTION PLAN
Required Information A DCP must be accompanied by a DCP Report which is to contain a Capital Expenditure Plan (CEP) and a Cost
for all DCPs Apportioning Schedule (CAS), and, which between them:
• identify the strategic basis for inclusion of each infrastructure item in the DCP
• specify the details of priority, staging and timing for the provision of infrastructure, and include any scenarios
under which this term may be extended or shortened
• detail the methodology for land valuation, and or basis for a standard or specification used for items of
infrastructure
• set out in detail the calculation of the cost contribution for each owner, or other unit to be charged such as (per
lot, dwelling, m2 etc) in the DCA, based on the methodology provided in the development contribution plan
• include all supporting documentation, such as technical reports, that support or justify any aspect of the
DCP to be included as Appendices to the DCP Report. eg traffic modelling for upgrading of roads to inform
apportionment of demand for the new infrastructure among the DCP landowners; an analysis of comparable
provision ratio statistics from adjoining established residential communities, where applicable, to support the
apportionment calculations
These documents do not form part of the scheme but provide important justification for the content of each DCP.
Templates are provided in the Infrastructure Contributions Guidelines detailing the recommended form and content
of the DCP Report and CAS.
The DCP Report (and Appendices) and CAS must be adopted for advertising to all owners at the same time the
related scheme amendment is advertised for comment.
Where a local government is seeking contributions for community infrastructure, these need to be supported by:
• a community infrastructure plan for the area, identifying the services and facilities required over the next 5-10
years (supported by demand analysis and identification of service catchments)
• a capital expenditure plan (with at least five years) which identifies the capital costs of facilities and the revenue
Documentation to sources (including capital grants) and programs for provision
support Community • projected growth figures, including the number of new dwellings to be created at catchment level (suburb or
Infrastructure items district)
• an analysis of comparable provision ratio statistics from adjoining established residential communities, where
applicable, to support the apportionment calculations
• methodology and supporting analysis for determining the proportion of costs of community infrastructure to be
attributed to growth and the proportion to be attributed to existing areas.

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
23
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
SCHEDULE 4 – REQUIREMENTS AND CONTENT OF A DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTION PLAN
Administrative items may be included as a DCP item, however, must relate directly to the work local government must do
to prepare and implement the DCP. Administration Items should be itemised in the DCP and include estimated costs for
each item in the DCP report:
• costs to prepare and review DCP cost estimates
• costs to prepare DCP cost apportionment schedule
• costs for undertaking valuations for DCP
• costs associated with structure planning and technical studies but only when associated with the preparation of a
DCP
Administrative Items • fees for professional services directly linked to preparation and implementation of DCP (eg legal and accounting
fees)
• costs for computer software and/or hardware upgrades necessary to enable DCP preparation
• proportion of staff salaries directly related to DCP administration – ‘management fees’ should directly relate to the
cost of labour to manage the DCP, rather than a percentage of total DCP costs
• details and justification of contingencies applied
• financial institution fees and charges associated with administration of DCP funds
• interest charged on loans taken out to pre-fund items included in DCP (established based on lending rates at the
time DCP is prepared).

State Planning Policy 3.6 –
24
Infrastructure Contributions
April 2021
SCHEDULE 5: ANNUAL REPORT TEMPLATE FOR DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTIONS PLANS
Name of DCP -
Report date -
Financial Year –
Table 1: Summary of delivery of infrastructure
Scheduled delivery/ Progress/status % detail of funding (DCP Reasons for delay
Item of infrastructure Expected delivery
priority in DCP (% complete) and by other sources) (if applicable)
Table 2: Financial position of DCF
Received/value Interest earned on
Current balance
contributions collected DCP funds expended/value Value of credits DCP funds
of DCF
or land area (if applicable)
Monetary component
in levies ($)
Works in kind
Land contribution
TOTAL
1. Has the DCF account be independently audited? (Yes/No) (Insert date)
2. Has the annual review of Cost Apportionment Schedule (CAS) and Cost Estimates been undertaken?
(Yes/No) (Frequency/ insert date)
3. Are dwelling forecasts current? (Yes/No) (Insert review date) – state any implications for the DCP
4. Identify any matters that may require future modifications to the DCP (slow rate of growth, unlikely to
develop) and if alternative funding needs to be investigated.
Note: The data used in the annual status report is to be provided in .csv format.