Department of Planning,
Lands and Heritage
Position
Statement:
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the Department © State of Western Australia website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au Some content reproduced from The Dark Sky Planning
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au Guideline June 2016 with the permission of the NSW
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, Published by the Department of Planning and Environment © State of
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002 New South Wales and Department of Planning and
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001 Environment, 2016
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result Perth WA 6000 This document is available in alternative
of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect formats on application to the
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred Locked Bag 2506 Communications Branch.
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before Perth WA 6001
applying the information contained in this document to Published January 2022
particular circumstances.

Position Statement:
1
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
1. Policy intent 2. Dark sky and
These principles are internationally
astrotourism in accepted and based on minimising
This policy details the Western Australian
the amount, direction, time and type
Western Australia
Planning Commission’s (WAPC) position
of artificial lighting that is used. It does
on the provision and designation of dark
not mean that communities must live in
sky locations, and the subdivision and 2.1 What is dark sky and darkness, but rather minimise light and
development implications throughout astrotourism? dust pollution. The association is also
Western Australia. It is intended to be used
responsible for determining locations with
by all planning decision-makers. Dark sky is night sky that is free from light
formal dark sky status.
and dust pollution to allow astronomical
observation. Light pollution often appears
2.3 Benefits of dark sky
as an orange smog which obscures the
night sky, as artificial and natural light
Applying dark sky principles is
reflect off moisture and dust particles in
generally cost-neutral and can provide
the sky.
environmental and social benefits. This
The concept of astrotourism is includes benefit from reduced lighting
integrating tourism opportunities with costs and energy consumption, improved
astronomical observation (both scientific safety by removing shadows and glare,
and recreational), photography and the enhanced astronomical observation,
environment. improved health outcomes from reduced
blue light exposure, and greater protection
There are several observatories within
for flora and fauna from the impacts of
Western Australia and their continued
light pollution.
operation relies upon a dark night sky,
free from light and dust pollution. These Western Australia’s tourism industry is
observatories contribute to local and always seeking to increase visitor numbers
international scientific, educational and and provide a more diverse tourism
cultural endeavours, tourism, defence and experience.
the economy.
Astrotourism is a relatively new and
emerging sector in the tourism industry,
2.2 Dark sky principles with widespread opportunities to promote
the State’s natural assets, including the
The International Dark-Sky Association
night sky.
is the recognised international authority
on light pollution, taking the lead in
identifying dark sky places and publicising
the impacts of artificial light, and
promoting several dark sky principles.

Position Statement:
2
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
3. Application of this 4. Policy objectives
Geographically WA is uniquely placed to the Commonwealth’s Environment
offer a combination of activities such as Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act policy
This policy seeks to:
traditional Aboriginal experiences, nature 1999 for Matters of National Environmental
based camping, tours, astro-festivals, star Significance. Decision-makers may refer This policy applies to planning proposals • preserve and protect the night sky for
gazing, astrophotography, scientific and proposals to the Environmental Protection across Western Australia, including: future generations in planned dark sky
educational learning, that are all directly Authority (EPA), the Department of locations
(a) the preparation or assessment of
linked to the night sky. Biodiversity Conservation and Attraction region schemes, regional strategies • minimise light and dust pollution
(DBCA) or the Commonwealth’s
The ability to capitalise on astrotourism or frameworks, sub-regional • establish a set of dark sky principles
Department of Agriculture, Water and the
through a flexible and responsive strategies, local planning strategies, to be implemented through land use
Environment (DAWE), and should refer to
planning framework can expand schemes and structure plans, or any planning mechanisms
their National Light Pollution Guidelines for
tourism opportunities and support local amendments to these • facilitate astrotourism through flexible
Wildlife (as amended) to mitigate potential
economies. (b) subdivision proposals local planning frameworks.
impacts.
(c) development proposals. • minimise the impacts of light pollution
2.4 Dark sky and wildlife on wildlife.
This policy does not apply retrospectively
to an existing approved use and/
Scientific studies show that light pollution
or development, or to development
and sky glow can have indirect and direct
which is exempt under the Planning and
physiological and behavioural impacts on
Development (Local Planning Schemes)
our wildlife. Exposure to certain types of
Regulations 2015 (the Regulations).
artificial light can result in changes to some
animals feeding and breeding behaviour, However, local governments, households,
reduced survivorship, and can attract private organisations and service
invasive pests or predators. authorities can use this policy to retrofit
or replace existing lighting throughout
Preserving dark skies through application
the State, irrespective of proximity to
of dark sky principles and minimising light
observatories, to be consistent with the
pollution can lead to positive outcomes for
relevant Australian Standards, Australian
light sensitive wildlife and complements
Standard 4282:2019 - control of the
existing environmental protection
obtrusive effects of lighting and the
frameworks.
principles listed within this policy.
Light pollution from subdivision and
This policy can also be used to guide
development proposals may impact
individuals who may wish to make a
on native or threatened species, which
contribution toward achieving dark sky
are protected under the Biodiversity
status in their local area.
Conservation Act 2016 or

Position Statement:
3
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
5. Policy measures observatories through indicative buffers Land use term/permissibility 5.3 District and local structure
or catchment areas, as well as inserting plans
Dark sky reserves and astrotourism
Limiting light pollution broad objectives to reduce light and dust
proposals are capable of being considered In its decision-making, the WAPC will
pollution.
The WAPC adopts the following design under ‘use not listed’ provisions of a require new district and local structure
principles to limit light pollution: scheme. However, if there is a desire plans to identify locations where dark sky is
Principle 1: Eliminate light spill 5.2 Local planning schemes to define the land use, the following proposed to be preserved and/or around
definition can be used: observatories.
Principle 2: Avoid over-lighting In its decision-making, the WAPC may
require special control areas to restrict light Astrotourism means premises used Local structure plans should also establish
Principle 3: Use energy-efficient bulbs
and dust pollution, to protect dark sky and for astronomical, commercial, scientific, the intention to apply dark sky principles at
Principle 4: Ensure lights are not directed astrotourism locations. cultural or environmental tourist activities subdivision and development stage.
towards reflective surfaces directly related to the night sky and may
Special Control Areas include incidental uses such as short-term
Principle 5: Use warm white colours 5.4 Subdivision
accommodation.
Special control areas can provide an
These principles are described in more effective means of maintaining dark sky In its decision-making, the WAPC will apply
In considering proposals for astrotourism,
detail in Appendix 1. within 20 kilometres of an observatory. The conditions to all subdivision applications
decision-makers will need to:
use of special control areas may be suitable where lighting is required, consistent with
• ensure any incidental uses relate to the
Limiting dust emissions where the night sky requires protection for dark sky principles to achieve a dark sky
predominant use
astrotourism, the environment, wildlife or across the State. Such conditions may
The WAPC seeks to protect the night sky
dark sky-related purposes not connected • ensure servicing is capable of meeting relate to roads, pedestrian areas, public
from the impacts of dust emissions from
to an observatory. The size of special the needs of the tour groups open spaces, sports lighting, public
dust-generating land uses and activities.
control area may be varied to suit the local • provide adequate carparking infrastructure, or dust generators.
context.
Implementation • manage overflow camping and Roads and pedestrian lighting
Special control areas should set out the caravan park uses
Where dark sky considerations are relevant, Road and pedestrian lighting (street
purpose and objectives, and specific • ensure appropriate protection and
this policy is to be applied at all stages of lighting) is necessary to public safety,
development requirements consistent management of environmental values
the planning process. however measures can be taken to ensure
with this policy. Special control areas
• any other matter the decision-maker
a balance between public safety and the
may also identify certain uses that may
and/or referral authority consider
5.1 Regional, sub-regional dark sky principles.
generate significant light and dust
relevant.
strategies and local planning pollution as requiring approval or being The WAPC, in consultation with the
strategies restricted, or to specify development relevant road authority, will apply
requirements to manage these impacts. conditions requiring street lighting to
In its decision-making, the WAPC will
Model special control area provisions are comply with the relevant Australian
require regional, sub-regional and local
included as Appendix 2 to this policy. Standards, use the lowest lighting
planning strategies to identify dark
subcategory for the appropriate road
sky locations and their purpose and
category specified in Table 2.1 of

Position Statement:
4
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
AS1158.1.2:2010 - Lighting for roads and 5.6 Development Applicants seeking approval for
public spaces, and comply with the dark developments which may otherwise be
Development approval
sky principles. The WAPC acknowledges exempt (i.e. an outbuilding that is non-
there may be circumstances where a In considering applications for compliant with the R-Codes) should be
greater level of lighting may be required development approval, decision- encouraged to install lighting consistent
for road safety. Lighting conditions may makers should ensure lighting and dust with the dark sky principles and Australian
be amended to reflect the appropriate management is consistent with the Standard 4282:2019 - control of the obtrusive
standard in conjunction with the road dark sky principles. These measures may effects of lighting.
authority and should have regard to the be demonstrated through a lighting
dark sky principles and objectives of this management plan and dust/construction
policy. management plan approved as part of the
application by the decision-maker, or as a
Public open space lighting
condition of approval. For most proposals,
Where lighting is to be installed, the WAPC a basic lighting management plan and/
will apply conditions requiring lighting or dust/construction management plan
to be in accordance with the dark sky will be sufficient. Lighting and dust
principles, and any relevant Australian management plans should be consistent
Standards. with this policy, Australian standards,
DWER Guidelines and include:
Where lighting for sporting activities is
required (i.e. football ovals, cricket pitches • a map/plan
and tennis courts), the WAPC will apply • lighting selection, location and
conditions requiring lighting to comply illuminance values
with the relevant Australian Standards for • potential light emission recipients,
the type of sporting activity or facility and including the possible impact on any
be consistent with the dark sky principles. protected wildlife species
• mitigation measures
5.5 Local planning policy
• maintenance/monitoring/reporting.
A local planning policy (LPP) may be used In considering lighting management for
to provide specific development standards a proposal with light pollution that may
for development applications in a local adversely impact a listed species under the
context. A model policy is provided at EPBC Act or State legislation, the Australian
Appendix 3, which can be adopted and/ Government’s National Light Pollution
or modified as required. Guidelines should be followed.

Position Statement:
5
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
Definitions
Astrotourism is any kind of tourism that National Light Pollution Guidelines
involves the night sky or visiting facilities for Wildlife means Commonwealth’s
related to astronomy like observatories, guidelines that provide a framework for
and combining that with the broader assessing and managing light pollution
sense of ecotourism and interacting with impacts on wildlife, as well as how to
the environment. manage artificial light.
Colour temperature is the perceived Observatory means any structure or land
colour of a light source ranging from cool containing optical and/or radio telescopes
(blue) to warm (red), measured in Kelvin used for scientific, tourism, business,
(K). A low correlated colour temperature defence and/or educational purposes.
such as 2500K will have a warm It includes permanent observatories,
appearance whilst 6500K will appear cold. defence observatories, land that is
frequently used for the above purposes
Dark sky place is the term used by the
and specifically those observatories listed
International Dark-Sky Association to
in Table 1.
certify places as being ‘dark’ and free from
light pollution. This term may relate to
communities, parks, reserves, sanctuaries,
Table 1: Western Australian Observatories
places and developments.
DWER Guidelines means the Department Observatory Location Local government
of Water and Environmental Regulation’s Gravity Discovery 1098 Military Road Shire of Gingin
Guidelines for managing the impacts of Centre Yeal WA 6503
dust and associated contaminants from Murchison Boolardy Station Shire of Murchison
land development sites, contaminated Radio-astronomy Beringarra Pindar Road
sites, remediation and other related Observatory Murchison WA 6630
activities (March 2011, as amended). Perth 337 Walnut Road Shire of Kalamunda
Observatory Bickley WA 6076
Dust generating activities includes any
Sandstone 1 Griffith Street Shire of Sandstone
development or works that generate solid/
Observatory Sandstone WA 6639
granular particles or materials that are or
could be windblown and dispersed into
the air.

Position Statement:
6
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
Appendix 1 –
Figure 2: Acceptable asymmetric lighting Figure 5: Non-shielded light fitting
Dark sky principles installed below an eave
The WAPC adopts the following principles to
guide implementation of dark sky standards:
Principle 1 – Eliminate light spill
Light spill is light that falls outside of the area
which is intended to be lit and contributes
directly to artificial sky glow. Lighting should
generally be:
• in the ‘as installed’ position to achieve 0%
upward light waste ratio (UWLR)
• directed downward and prevented from Figure 3: Non-shielded light fitting Figure 6: Shielded light fitting
shining above the horizontal plane
• shielded
• mounted under eaves, verandas or roof
• internalised within buildings
• using directional fittings to ensure that light
is directed
• mounted higher to reduce light spill, through
a more efficient and effective light spread.
Figure 1: Common aspects of
light pollution
Figure 4: Shielded light fitting Figure 7: Shielded flood lights

Position Statement:
7
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
Principle 2 – Avoid over lighting Principle 5 – Use warm white colours Figure 8: Kelvin temperature chart
Note: With LEDs, any colour temperature can be produced,
Lighting should be minimised to light the The major difference between types but warm colours are preferred
task, rather than the environment. of light bulbs is the distribution in light
wavelength. The choice of light type
This can be achieved by using fewer lights,
can affect observatories because some
lights that generate less light (lumens)
telescopes can filter light at certain
use of dimmer switches and switching
wavelengths, preventing interference with
lights off when not required, particularly
observations, whereas others cannot.
between the hours of 11:00pm and sunrise
As the atmosphere scatters blue-white
(such as smart lighting or other efficient
light waves the most, outdoor lighting
lighting technologies).
should use warm white or filtered LEDs
with a correlated colour temperature (CCT)
Principle 3 – Use energy efficient bulbs
of less than 2500K (Figure 8).
Improvements in technology means that
lights are now smaller and more powerful,
using smaller amounts of energy (watts) Table 2: reflective properties of common
to generate the same amount of light surfaces
(lumens). Energy-efficient globes such as
Reflective
LEDs and compact fluorescent should be Surface
properties
used.
Natural grass and vegetation Low
Painted surface (dark) Low
Principle 4 – Ensure lights are not
directed towards Pre-coloured factory metal (dark) Low
reflective surfaces Brick (dark) Low
Consideration should be given to Raw or stained timber Medium
the reflectivity of surfaces within a Stone surface Medium
development. Surfaces such as grass Uncoloured concrete High
have low reflective properties, whereas
Painted surface (light) High
uncoloured concrete, sand or light-
Artificial grass (sand base) High
coloured walls have a high reflectivity.
A schedule of colours and materials should Pre-coloured factory metal High
(light)
be provided with an application, or as
Brick (light) High
a condition of approval where required
by the decision maker. Table 2 provides Zincalume steel (unpainted) High
a guide to the reflective properties of
common surfaces.

Position Statement:
8
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
Appendix 2 –
Special Control Areas
model provisions
Name of area Purpose Objectives Additional Provisions
[INSERT SPECIAL To protect the night 1. Preserve and protect the night sky 1. Development approval is required
CONTROL AREA sky and environment for future generations. for [INSERT USE/DEVELOPMENT]
NAME/NUMBER] from artificial light within the special control area.
2. Minimise impacts of dust pollution.
[AND/OR] dust
2. The local government may require
pollution. 3. Facilitate astrotourism through
a lighting management plan [AND/
flexible local planning frameworks.
OR] dust management plan where
4. To protect astronomical, the proposal may result in light
commercial, scientific, cultural pollution [AND/OR] dust pollution.
and environmental land uses that
3. The above provisions may be
rely upon the night sky from the
varied at the discretion of the local
adverse impacts of subdivision and
government and on the advice of
development.
any relevant referral agency.
5. To facilitate development that
supports astrotourism opportunities.
6. Minimise the impact of light
pollution on wildlife.

Position Statement:
9
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
Appendix 3 –
Model local planning policy
Purpose
[INSERT PURPOSE STATEMENT]
To provide guidance on light spill and dust management for
development proposals located within identified dark sky and
astrotourism locations, or in locations where the local government
deems applicable.
Objectives
• [INSERT OBJECTIVES]
• This policy seeks to preserve and protect the night sky for future
generations through environmentally-responsible outdoor lighting
and dust management.
• Provide a basis for decision-making and establishment of principles
to achieve night sky protection.
• To identify and protect wildlife from the effects of light pollution.
Legal status
This policy is adopted under deemed provisions of the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 which enables
the [INSERT LOCAL GOVERNMENT] to prepare local planning policies
for any matter related to the planning and development of the
Scheme area. The local planning policy can only have effect where
consistent with the deemed provisions and local planning scheme.
Definitions/abbreviations
Name of area Additional Provisions
Asymmetric Asymmetric beams allow light to be concentrated in one direction and prevents the need
for light fittings to be mounted such that they are pointed down.
Colour temperature The perceived colour of a light source ranging from cool (blue) to warm (red), measured
in Kelvin (K). A low correlated colour temperature such as 2500K will have a warm
appearance whilst 6500K will appear cold.
Dark Sky Principles Principle 1: Eliminate light spill
Principle 2: Avoid over lighting
Principle 3: Use energy efficient bulbs
Principle 4: Ensure lights are not directed towards reflective surfaces
Principle 5: Use warm white colours
Development As defined in the Planning and Development Act (2005)
Observatory Any structure or land containing permanent optical and/or radio telescopes that are fixed
or erected and used for scientific, tourism, business, defence and/or educational purposes.
Includes permanent observatories, land that is frequently used for the above purposes,
and those observatories listed in the Dark Sky and Astrotourism Position Statement.
Regulations Means the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015.
Scheme Means the [INSERT SCHEME]
Symmetric Symmetric beams are produced by fittings that distribute light equally in all directions and
is typically seen in floodlighting. This form of lighting is detrimental to the night sky and
contributed toward artificial sky glow.

Position Statement:
10
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
Policy Provisions
1. Specified exemptions
[INSERT EXEMPTIONS]
This policy does not apply to:
1.1 Development exempt under Clause 61 of the Regulations.
1.2 Residential development of Single Houses (including the development, extension or ancillary structures on the same lot).
1.3 A change of land use unless there is a works component, which is not exempt under this policy.
Unless located within a special control area.
2. Development standards
2.1 General
Lighting management
[INSERT LIGHTING MANAGEMENT STANDARDS]
2.1.1 A lighting management plan is to be submitted with all applications subject to this policy. Where a lighting management plan is
not submitted, the [INSERT LOCAL GOVERNMENT] may, at its discretion, refuse to accept the application under clause 63 of the
Regulations. Alternatively, the [INSERT LOCAL GOVERNMENT] may apply a condition requiring a lighting management plan, prior to
commencement of development. This may include any details relevant to the ensuring that the application is consistent with Dark
Sky Principles, at the Local Government’s discretion. Where no external lighting is proposed, this should be stated.
2.1.2 All lighting must:
• be pointed downward to prevent upward light spill
• be shielded such that only the intended area to be lit is illuminated, and any light spill created by the luminaire which is not
directed to the intended area is effectively shrouded. (see the Western Australian Planning Commission’s Dark Sky Position
Statement for examples)
• be commensurate with the intended use of the land and to the minimum standard to ensure safety and security, but no greater
• be switched off or on a timer so that lighting is off/minimal between the hours of 10pm and 4am
• use energy-efficient lighting bulbs/systems (i.e. LED)
• use warm white or filtered LEDs with a correlated colour temperature (CCT) of less than 2500K
• be asymmetric (when floodlighting is required)
• only face surfaces with low reflective properties in accordance with Table 1.
Table 1: Surface reflectivity
Reflective Reflective
Surface Surface
properties properties
Natural grass and vegetation Low Uncoloured concrete High
Painted surface (dark) Low Painted surface (light) High
Pre-coloured factory metal (dark) Low Artificial grass (sand base) High
Brick (dark) Low Pre-coloured factory metal (light) High
Raw or stained timber Medium Brick (light) High
Stone surface Medium Zincalume steel (unpainted) High
Dust management
[INSERT DUST MANAGEMENT STANDARDS]
2.1.3 Where development may result in the generation of dust, applications should include a dust management plan as part of an
application for development approval. Where a dust management plan is not submitted, the [INSERT LOCAL GOVERNMENT] may
apply a dust condition requiring a management plan, prior to commencement of development. The dust management plan
should be consistent with the Department of Water and Environmental Regulation’s A guideline for managing the impacts of dust
and associated contaminants from land development sites, contaminated sites remediation and other related activities (March 2011).
2.2 Commercial/Industrial/Mixed Use/Non-residential
2.2.1 In addition to the general provisions of this policy, a condition will be applied requiring compliance with Australian Standard
4282-2019: Control of obtrusive effects of outdoor lighting.

Position Statement:
11
Dark sky and astrotourism
January 2022
2.3 Signage
2.3.1 In addition to the general provisions of this policy, internally or externally lit signage should comply with the internationally accepted
limits in accordance with Table 2.
Table 2: Signage luminosity
Illuminated areas Maximum luminance at a point
(square metres) (candela per square metre)
More than 10 300
2 to 10 600
0.5 to 2 800
Less than 0.5 1000