Development Control Policy 1.6
Planning to Support Transit Use and Transit
Oriented Development
Background notes 2
1 Introduction 3
2 Application of the policy 4
3 Policy objectives 4
4 Policy measures 5
4.1 Transit-supportive development patterns 5
4.2 Land use to support transit 5
4.3 The public domain in transit oriented precincts 6
4.4 Transit supportive design 7
4.5 Integrating transit infrastructure 7
4.6 Precinct planning 8
5 Implementation 8
Indicative area of application of policy 9
January 2006
1

Background notes
Amendments to Development Control Policy 1.6 Planning To Enhance Public Transport Use DC
1.6 1999,was adopted by the Western Australian Planning Commission (WAPC) in 2005 to
reflect the Government's vision for a sustainable future as outlined in the Network city and the
State Sustainability Strategy. The amended policy is titled Development Control Policy 1.6
Planning to Support Transit Use and Transit Oriented Development.
The Perth and Peel region now has a public transport system that is sufficiently extensive to
consistently promote land uses that maximise the opportunities for land use and public transport
integration. This integrated approach serves to enhance accessibility by travel modes other than
the private car,and plays a significant part in the promotion and maintenance of urban
sustainability.
Within existing developed areas,there are clear opportunities to intensify existing activities and to
promote new uses that will make better use of transit facilities and services. As the public
transport system is further refined and extended,there will be emerging opportunities for new
development that is focused upon,and maximises the benefits derived from significant new public
investments in transit infrastructure.
There are obvious benefits of a planning policy that encourages the integration of land use and
transit facilities. Higher residential densities and mixed use developments in the walkable
catchments of transit facilities have the potential to reduce car dependence; to increase
accessibility for those without access to private cars; to reduce congestion on the road network
and the demand for new road space; to reduce fuel consumption and air pollution; and to provide
quality diverse and affordable forms of housing and development. These benefits combine to
produce an attractive and viable alternative to car-based suburban and urban fringe development.
Mixing compatible uses in transit-oriented precincts within an environment that favours walking
and cycling makes it possible to reduce private vehicle use. It becomes feasible for trips to
become multi-purpose (ie to serve several trip purposes at the one location) and to include travel
on multiple modes,therefore reducing the number of separate trips requiring private vehicle use.
Mixing uses also promotes more efficient operation of the system by generating travel demand in
both directions and spreading transit use beyond the morning and evening peak periods.
This policy seeks to maximise the benefits to the community of an effective and well used public
transit system by promoting planning and development outcomes that will support and sustain
public transport use,and which will achieve the more effective integration of land use and public
transport infrastructure.
The policy is an integral part of a range of policies directed towards greater urban sustainability,
in accordance with the State Planning Strategy and Statement of Planning Policy 3 Urban Growth
and Settlements (SPP3). The following policy measures from SPP3 are particularly relevant to
this policy:
• Supporting higher residential densities in and around neighbourhood centres,high
frequency public transport nodes and interchanges.
• Clustering retail,employment,recreational and other activities which attract large
numbers of people in activity centres around major public transport nodes so as to
reduce the need to travel,encourage non-car modes and create attractive,
high amenity mixed-use urban centres.
• Providing access for all to employment,health,education,shops,leisure
and community facilities by locating new development so as to be
accessible by foot,bicycle or public transport rather than having to
depend on access by car.
2 Development Control Policy 1.6 Planning to Support Transit Use and January 2006
Transit Oriented Development

1 Introduction • about 10-15 minutes walking time,or
an 800 m distance,for rail stations,
transit interchanges or major bus transfer
Policy approach
stations or terminals,and
The development potential related to transit • about 5-7 minutes walking time,or
facilities in metropolitan Perth is variable,and 400 m,for bus stops located on bus
the nature of the relationship between transit routes with multiple bus services that are
and land use cannot easily be classified into a high frequency of 15 minutes or less
consistent set of development scenarios that during peak periods (see map attached).
readily lend themselves to corresponding
individual policy approaches. It is also accepted that these distances may be
exceeded under particular circumstances,for
The nature and role of transit facilities example where a rail station lies centrally
themselves is also not static,but changes over within a confined ‘corridor’of development
time,sometimes in response to localised that may somewhat exceed 1600 m in total
factors but also in response to wider policy width. They may also be limited in some local
decisions,for example on service frequencies, cases,for example where physical barriers
fare structures and other operational factors. prevent access.
The actual physical form of transit facilities
may also change,through the improvement of Where the nature of bus services and facilities
individual components of the system,or are such that they can be considered to offer
through wider network revisions and the same level of service and ‘permanence’as
extensions. rail-based services,the provisions of this
Policy will normally be applied to the
In this context,and in recognition of the level precincts around those facilities. In the case of
at which the WAPC is able to influence these typical on-road bus stops on normal local
issues,this policy takes a generalised rather routes,it is accepted that the potential lack of
than geographically place-based approach, permanence of such facilities and services
while still seeking to ensure that the may make a direct transit oriented
provisions reflect and address the variety of development (TOD) response difficult,
situations in which the relationship between however the general guidance provided in this
urban form,land use and transit may be Policy on planning for bus-based transit in the
enhanced,promoted and planned for. urban structure should still be applied.
This approach places much of the emphasis It is accepted that the development potential in
for the detailed delivery of transit related TOD precincts as defined in this policy will be
development outcomes upon local government variable. The policy establishes principles that
planning processes,through the preparation should be adhered to wherever possible,but
and consistent application of appropriate TOD requires a place-based approach to
provisions within town planning schemes,and precinct planning and design to define,protect
associated planning policies and design and secure optimal TOD outcomes.
controls,developed and applied under the
guidance provided by this WAPC policy. Measuring accessibility
Achieving the policy’s objectives will
therefore require a collaborative approach In making a broad assessment of accessibility
between the WAPC and local governments. to transit facilities,and in reviewing the
associated urban structure,the threshold
It is also critical to the effectiveness of the
distances described above can be taken as
policy that state government agencies apply its
simple radial measurements,however a much
principles in the development and
more accurate picture of real accessibility can
implementation of government projects.
be obtained by using the ‘ped-shed’,or
walkable catchment,technique,plotting actual
Defining ‘transit oriented precincts’
walking distances against the existing or
proposed street network.
Research into the relationship between
accessibility and the use of transit facilities As well as providing a very good picture of
consistently indicates that there is a common the overall level of accessibility to transit
'threshold' for walking to those facilities. This afforded by neighbourhood structure,this
equates to: technique can also be very helpful in
identifying specific issues and shortcomings of
a development pattern that may be addressed
Development Control Policy 1.6 Planning to Support Transit Use and January 2006 3
Transit Oriented Development

by making in some cases relatively simple 3 Policy objectives
changes that have a significant impact on the
overall level of accessibility within a place.
• To promote and facilitate the use of
public transport as a more sustainable
The WAPC therefore encourages the use of the
alternative to the private car for personal
‘ped-shed’and related techniques for
travel,to enhance community
designing and testing subdivisions for
accessibility to services and facilities,
accessibility to transit facilities,and will itself
including employment opportunities,
apply those techniques in assessing relevant
community services and recreational
proposals.
facilities,and to improve equity in
accessibility for those who do not own or
have access to a car.
2 Application of the
• To encourage spatial patterns of
policy
development that make it easier to plan
and efficiently operate public transport
This policy applies to all areas of the state,
services,and for the existing and
within transit precincts as defined under the
potential users of public transport to
policy,and is intended to inform government
access those services.
agencies,local government,landowners and
prospective developers of the policy approach • To encourage balanced public transport
which will be applied by the WAPC when rider-ship along transit corridors by
considering: creating places that are destinations as
well as points of departure.
• development or redevelopment within
transit oriented precincts as defined in • To ensure the optimal use of land within
section 1 of this policy; transit oriented precincts by encouraging
the development of uses and activities
• the need for transit services and the
that will benefit from their proximity and
provision proposed to be made for those
accessibility to public transport,and
services in new development areas; and
which will in turn generate a demand for
the use of transit infrastructure and
• proposals for the redevelopment of
services.
existing transit facilities and other
network changes and improvements. • To ensure that opportunities for transit
supportive development are realised,both
The policy will be applied by the WAPC:
on public and privately owned land,and
• in determining subdivision and that transit infrastructure is effectively
development applications; integrated with other development,to
maximise safety,security and
• in advising on town planning schemes, convenience for transit users.
scheme amendments and local planning
strategies; • To promote and facilitate walking and
cycling within transit oriented precincts
• in preparing and reviewing structure by establishing and maintaining high
plans for developing areas and areas levels of amenity,safety and permeability
undergoing redevelopment; in the urban form,and to promote and
facilitate opportunities for integrating
• in preparing amendments to the
transport modes by creating opportunities
Metropolitan Region Scheme and to
for convenient,safe and secure mode
country region schemes; and
interchange.
• in providing advice to the Minister for
Planning and Infrastructure on matters
relevant to the application of the policy.
4 Development Control Policy 1.6 Planning to Support Transit Use and January 2006
Transit Oriented Development

4 Policy measures 4.1.5 Structure plan preparation and
subdivision design in ‘greenfield’
situations should make appropriate
4.1 Transit-supportive development
provision for the planning and operation
patterns of bus services. A grid-based street
pattern is supported because it provides
Urban structure is the foundation of a transit
for more direct,better spaced transit
supportive environment. Effective transit is
routes,disperses general traffic more
fostered by a more compact urban form,
effectively to limit congestion that can
mixed uses,higher development densities and
impede bus services,and provides
activity levels,and especially by spatial
permeability and maximum flexibility in
patterns of development that make it easier to
bus route planning. Road network
plan and efficiently operate transit services,
planning should also ensure that all
and for users to access those services once
relevant local and district facilities,
they are in place. For these reasons:
including shopping facilities,recreation
4.1.1 The street pattern within transit-oriented facilities,schools and other community
precincts should be designed to enhance facilities,can be accessed by bus
general walkability,and to facilitate services.
pedestrian access to transit facilities. A
4.1.6 As with rail stations,bus stations and
responsive grid pattern provides good
major bus interchanges should be
general permeability and connectivity
serviced by a well connected network of
and a choice of routes,but may need to
local streets that maximises accessibility
be modified to accommodate radial
for those within walking distance of the
connections focused on transit stops,
facilities,and in general,the provisions
particularly closer to the stop,to provide
of this policy relating to matters such as
more direct access and reduce the need
accessibility,amenity,safety and security
for pedestrians to ‘zigzag’through the
also apply to the bus services and
grid of streets.
facilities provided at those locations.
4.1.2 Street patterns that require pedestrians to
divert from the most direct routes,and 4.2 Land use to support transit
especially to backtrack,should be
The level of transit patronage is closely linked
avoided. If absolutely necessary,short
to the quality and frequency of the service
lengths of pedestrian access way may be
provided. In turn,the service able to be
used to provide ‘missing links’through
provided is a function of the density and mix
the grid,provided that their safety and
of land uses that generate potential transit
security can be ensured,however under
users. An appropriate mix and balance of land
most circumstances good street layout
uses can be a major contributor to the use and
and design should be used to minimise
effectiveness of transit facilities. Within
walking distances,rather than a
transit-oriented precincts,the emphasis should
segregated system of pedestrian routes.
be on uses which are likely to promote transit
4.1.3 The street pattern within transit-oriented use,and which will benefit by being
precincts should be designed to enhance accessible to and by transit facilities.
commuter and recreational cycling,and
Mixing compatible uses in transit-oriented
to facilitate cyclist access to transit
precincts within an environment that favours
facilities. A responsive grid pattern with
walking,makes it possible for one transit trip
on and off road facilities provides good
to serve a wide variety of purposes,compared
general permeability and connectivity
to dispersed uses that are more likely to
and a choice of routes.
generate several separate trips,which will be
4.1.4 A diversity of lot sizes in subdivisions made mainly by car. For these reasons:
within transit oriented precincts,
matched with a robust street layout,is 4.2.1 Residential development should be
encouraged close to transit facilities,to
encouraged as it provides greater
help in creating a sense of place that
flexibility of development options,and
makes a TOD precinct more than just a
enhances the robustness of the urban
place where transit is available,giving
structure,making it easier for the
places an individual identity within the
precinct to evolve over time through a
urban fabric.
progressive intensification of activities
and change to uses that will more
effectively support transit use.
Development Control Policy 1.6 Planning to Support Transit Use and January 2006 5
Transit Oriented Development

4.2.2 Higher density residential development, for example playing fields,should not be
in particular,places greater numbers of dominant elements within the walkable
residents close to transit services, catchment of transit facilities.
increasing the potential for those
residents to look to transit as a travel 4.2.6 Encouraging the greater use of transit
services for journeys to work is an
option,with a corresponding increase in
important policy objective; however,
patronage. In reviewing town planning
land-extensive,low development-and-
schemes and proposed scheme
employment density activities such as
amendments that include transit
some general industrial uses,bulky
precincts as defined by this policy,the
goods retailing and business parks,and
WAPC will expect local governments to
warehousing should not be located
identify and promote opportunities for
within transit-oriented precincts unless it
residential development at a minimum
can be demonstrated that the particular
density of 25 dwellings per hectare,and
circumstances of a development will
will expect the application of densities
favour transit use.
substantially higher than 25 dwellings
per hectare where sites have the
4.2.7 Building robustness into the planning of
advantage of close proximity to a rail
transit oriented precincts is also
station,major bus interchange or bus
encouraged because it can make it easier
route that provides service frequencies
for the area to evolve,and for the
equivalent to rail. The WAPC will also
progressive replacement of less intensive
work with local governments in the
uses and activities,for example
development of measures and incentives
replacing surface level car parking with
to ensure that coded densities are
structured parking and more intensive
achieved in practice.
uses,including more compact mixed use
developments and higher density
4.2.3 Densities should be increased through a
residential uses.
subdivision pattern,which allows for the
progressive intensification of activities.
4.2.8 The development of transit supportive
In newer suburbs it is sometimes not
uses on publicly owned land has the
practical to achieve higher densities at
potential to catalyse other similar
the initial stages of subdivision,
changes within transit-oriented precincts,
particularly when public transport
especially where the public land is
services are not yet fully implemented.
strategically located. The WAPC will
In such cases the subdivision pattern
encourage public agencies,in either
should be robust,to allow for future
disposing of surplus publicly owned land
more intensive subdivision and
within transit oriented precincts,or
development as the suburbs mature and
developing their own land for public
demand for public transport increases.
purposes,to consider the implications
for accessibility to,and the use of transit
4.2.4 Other uses that are likely to be
services.
significant generators of transit trips
should also be located close to transit
4.2.9 It is can be particularly desirable to
facilities wherever possible. Relevant
locate major civic buildings in TOD
uses include offices and other ‘high-
precincts,where they can actively
density’employment- generating
contribute to the amenity of the area and
activities,intensive leisure facilities,and
act as significant generators of transit
retailing. Similar considerations apply to
use.
uses such as aged persons development,
schools and tertiary education uses,
4.3 The public domain in transit
hospitals,community facilities and
oriented precincts
social services.
4.2.5 Locating educational buildings within Almost all transit users are pedestrians for at
transit-oriented precincts is appropriate least a part of their journey,even if only for a
where they include the more intensive short walk from a train or bus to a park-and-
elements of the institution such as ride facility. The amenity,quality and safety of
teaching facilities and indoor recreation the public domain within transit oriented
facilities,however the more land- precincts are therefore important factors in
extensive/low-intensity elements of establishing and maintaining an environment
schools and other similar ‘public’uses, that will encourage people to access transit
6 Development Control Policy 1.6 Planning to Support Transit Use and January 2006
Transit Oriented Development

facilities on foot,as well as promoting support the station,for example retail
walking generally within these uses that will provide services to,and
neighbourhoods. For these reasons: benefit from the custom of transit users.
4.3.1 Streetscapes should include features that 4.4.3 The design of developments,especially
will help to promote walking by in proximity to stations,should be
improving the general level of amenity robust,to allow for the use of buildings
along pedestrian routes to and from the to change over time,to uses that may be
transit facility. Climate moderation in the more appropriate to a transit-oriented
form of verandas,canopies and arcades, precinct and supportive of transit use.
and landscaping,will help to increase
the level of comfort for pedestrians and 4.5 Integrating transit infrastructure
the likelihood that people will see
walking to the transit stop as an The integration of transit facilities and other
attractive option. Well-lit pedestrian land uses is actively promoted by this policy,
routes and waiting areas are also and the design and operation of transit
essential for convenience and safety. infrastructure should assist in integrating
transit facilities with their surroundings. For
4.3.2 Continuity of footpaths should be these reasons:
ensured along both sides of the street
within transit precincts. Neighbourhood 4.5.1 Transit infrastructure should be designed
layouts should be planned to avoid to suit the scale and character of its
pedestrians having to cross major roads, surroundings.
or to traverse or be forced out of their
4.5.2 Transit facilities should be designed to
direct way to by-pass other obstacles to
provide a high standard of amenity for
access transit facilities.
transit users,with appropriate station-
4.4 Transit supportive design based facilities,and a safe and secure
environment,especially for those users
Section 1 of this policy highlights the accessing the facilities on foot or by
importance of an appropriate framing urban bicycle.
structure in transit-oriented precincts. Design
4.5.3 Transit facilities should be designed to
and structure planning,including subdivision
facilitate mode interchange in a safe,
plans and road design,must also take into
secure and convenient manner,and
account bus services and their design
without dominating the station setting or
requirements . The design of individual
restricting easy pedestrian access.
developments,especially where they have an
immediate relationship with transit facilities,
4.5.4 Where the transit facility includes
can be a significant factor in encouraging
significant building structures,it should
increased use of public transport. For these
be designed to reflect the civic nature of
reasons:
the transit function,to contribute to the
quality of the public realm,and to assist
4.4.1 Land uses that promote interest,
in the legibility of the station in its
interaction and activity should be used to
precinct setting.
animate frontages along the principal
pedestrian routes leading to and from the
4.5.5 The development of new transit
transit facility. Uses should be oriented
infrastructure should consider the
to the street and the public domain,and
possible severance effects of new line
should include activities at ground floor
work on existing and future local
level that promote interaction and
community connections. Where an
surveillance,provide interest for
existing or proposed station development
pedestrians,enhance security,and
incorporates a pedestrian crossing point
increase the attractiveness of walking to
that plays an important role in assisting
access transit facilities.
local connectivity and accessibility,the
design of the station should allow for
4.4.2 Development should be designed to
that crossing to be available for public
facilitate access to and enhance the
use at all times,rather than just during
legibility of transit facilities. There may
the operating hours of the station.
be opportunities for the physical
integration of developments with transit
infrastructure,incorporating uses that
Development Control Policy 1.6 Planning to Support Transit Use and January 2006 7
Transit Oriented Development

4.6 Precinct planning • the potential to use planning provisions
to provide incentives for appropriate
In order to maximise the potential of transit development in transit oriented precincts,
oriented precincts to support and engender including reduced parking standards and
increased use of transit services,they will floor-space ‘bonuses’.
typically require comprehensive planning,
which has regard for community values. In the For the immediate environs of transit facilities,
case of new development areas,this will local government is encouraged to consider
generally occur through the preparation of a the preparation of precinct plans that provide
structure plan. In the case of already- greater detail with respect to both land use and
developed areas,it may be through the the physical form and relationship of
preparation of a precinct plan,either on an development in the precinct to the transit
individual basis or as a part of the process for facility,including design guidelines.
developing a local planning strategy,and
leading to the inclusion of appropriate
provisions within the local town planning 5 Implementation
scheme. Liaison with the Public Transport
Authority is highly desirable at this stage.
This policy will be implemented by the WAPC
in the following ways:
Local planning strategies should describe the
existing and proposed public transport
• In providing advice to the Minister on
network serving the strategy or plan area,
the preparation,review and amendment
should identify specific opportunities for
of town planning schemes.
integrating land use and public transport and
maximising the use of transit facilities within • In providing advice to local government
the study area,and should clearly articulate on the preparation,review and
how those opportunities will be realised amendment of town planning schemes,
through the inclusion of appropriate planning and the preparation of local planning
provisions within the local town planning strategies.
scheme. The WAPC will work collaboratively
with local government to ensure that relevant • In considering applications to subdivide
opportunities are identified and optimised. land within transit oriented precincts.
In carrying out the necessary analysis as part • In determining applications to develop
of the local planning strategy process,and in land within transit oriented precincts.
developing related planning provisions,local
• In considering structure plans for new
governments should have particular regard to
development areas and for the
matters such as:
redevelopment of existing urban areas.
• residential density and diversity;
The WAPC will support the policy by:
• the scale and intensity of non residential
• promoting and publicising successful
uses; especially car oriented land uses;
transit oriented development projects;
• the encouragement of public transport
• supporting the ongoing development of a
use over car use;
TOD program within government as a
• the encouragement of mixed use key mechanism for implementing the
development,both generally and within principles of Network city;
individual developments;
• encouraging community engagement in
• flexible and robust planning provisions local visioning processes with a TOD
that allow for uses and activities in a focus;
transit oriented precinct to change and
• working to develop local and state
intensify over time;
government partnerships for the
• the development and application of implementation of TOD;
scheme parking standards that reflect the
• providing ongoing guidance to the
availability within the precinct of transit
development industry and local
facilities and that provide discretion to
government in the application of this
vary standards,and to progressively
policy; and
replace surface level car parking close to
stations with other more transit • providing incentives for affordable
supportive uses over time; and housing near transit.
8 Development Control Policy 1.6 Planning to Support Transit Use and January 2006
Transit Oriented Development

Indicative area of application of policy
City of Wanneroo
City of Swan
City of Joondalup
City of Stirling
Shire of Mundaring
River
Swan Shire of Kalamunda
City of Fremantle City of
Gosnells
Indian
City of Cockburn
City of Armadale
Town of
Kwinana
Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale
Ocean
City of Rockingham
Shire of Murray
City of Mandurah
Development Control Policy 1.6 Planning to Support Transit Use and January 2006 9
Transit Oriented Development
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
N
GEOCENTRIC DATUM OF AUSTRALIA 0 2 4 6 8 10
kilometres
Produced by Project Mapping Section,
Mapping and GeoSpatial Data Branch,
Department for Planning and Infrastructure,
on behalf of the Western Australian Planning
Commission, Perth, WA January 2006
Legend
●
●
●
Base information supplied by DLI PA 23-2003
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
ntw-map9\projects\pol\urb\gro_man\DCP1.6\
bus_services\hi_frequency_bus_services_V8.dgn
train and bus stations,
bus transfers and park’n’ride
high frequency bus services
transit oriented precinct (as defined in the policy)
local government boundary
Note:
This map is intended to indicate, rather than define, the
coverageoftransitorientedprecincts(asdescribedatDefining
’TransitOrientedPrecincts’ withinthepolicy)which thepolicy
appliesto. Itisbasedonpublictransportfacilitiesandservices
at the date of printing, which over time will evolve with
development. This map should be interpreted in conjunction
withthepolicy’sprovisionsandadvicefromtheDepartmentfor
Planning and Infrastructure and Public Transport Authority to
confirm the public transport facilities and services.
Please notethat thetransitoriented precincts related tohigh
frequencybusservicesarebasedononlythestopsutilisedby
those services rather than the entire route.