Residential Design Codes – Volume 1
R-Codes Volume 1
practice notes
April 2024
The Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage acknowledges © State of Western Australia
the traditional owners and custodians of this land. We pay our Published by the
respect to Elders past and present, their descendants who are Western Australian Planning Commission
with us today, and those who will follow in their footsteps. Gordon Stephenson House
140 William Street
Perth WA 6000
Disclaimer
Locked Bag 2506
This document has been produced by the Department
Perth WA 6001
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, Published April 2024
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for any
tel: 08 6551 8002
damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result of
fax: 08 6551 9001
action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect of
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred to
herein. Professional advice should be obtained before applying This document is available in alternative formats
the information contained in this document to particular on application to the Department of Planning, Lands and
circumstances. Heritage Communications Branch.

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
Introduction
The Residential Design Codes Volume 1 (R-Codes)
are a Planning Code prepared by the Western
Australian Planning Commission (WAPC) and made
under Part 3A of the Planning and Development Act
2005. The R-Codes outline standards for residential
development in Western Australia; and, with the
exception of some lot/site or precinct-specific
circumstances, they form the basis for the design
and assessment of most residential development in
Western Australia.
Right of review
Where a decision-maker refuses an application or
imposes conditions considered unreasonable by the
applicant, a right of review exists and an application
may be lodged with the State Administrative
Tribunal (SAT), under the provisions of the Planning
and Development Act 2005. Further information
about the SAT review process and its application
procedures and fees is available online at
www.sat.justice.wa.gov.au/
Practice Notes
These Practice Notes address the most common The R-Codes Vol. 1 Part C are provided with
technical matters that arise in the interpretation and similar advice in the Explanatory Guidelines under
implementation of the R-Codes Vol. 1 Part B. ‘assessment guidance’.
They aim to provide clarity and certainty to
The Practice Notes do not form part of the R-Codes
applicants, assessors and decision-makers through
and may be updated from time to time as a
consistent application of the R-Codes.
supplement to the R-Codes Explanatory guidelines.
Words bolded in these Practice Notes are defined
in the R-Codes.
2

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 What is the role of the The WAPC has prepared the R-Codes Explanatory Guidelines in consultation with decision-makers and
1.5 Explanatory Guidelines stakeholders to give context to R-Codes Vol. 1 standards and guidance, and assist in the interpretation
Explanatory and the Practice Notes and assessment of proposals. The Explanatory Guidelines should be considered in the determination of
Guidelines and how do they proposals but should not be rigidly applied nor fetter discretion.
differ?
While both the R-Codes Explanatory Guidelines and Practice Notes are supplementary to the R-Codes
Vol. 1, the Explanatory Guidelines provide a comprehensive guide for the assessment of residential
development against all R-Codes Vol. 1 ‘deemed-to-comply’ and ‘design principles’. In comparison, the
Practice Notes seek to address specific technical queries and matters regarding the interpretation of
certain ‘deemed-to-comply’ standards of the R-Codes Vol. 1 that are regularly the subject of application
uncertainty and consequential assessment and determination inconsistency. Clarification of these
queries/matters through the Practice Notes aims to improve understanding and application consistency
for applicants, assessors and decision-makers.
R-Codes Vol. 1 Does the erection In accordance with Schedule 2, clause 61 of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
2.2 or extension of Regulations 2015, the erection or extension of a single house, ancillary dwelling, outbuilding,
Single house a single house external fixtures, boundary wall or fence, patio, pergola, verandah, deck, garage, carport or
approvals require development swimming pool that satisfies the ‘deemed-to-comply’ provisions of the R-Codes Vol. 1 does not require
approval? development approval, unless the development is located in a place that is a heritage-protected place.
If a proposal for a single house does not satisfy a ‘deemed-to-comply’ requirement/s of the R-Codes
Vol. 1, the decision-maker will require an application for development approval and payment of a fee to
process that application.
Development approval may be required where a proposal does not comply with any applicable
requirement of a scheme, structure plan, local development plan or local planning policy that modifies
the deemed-to-comply provisions of the R-Codes.
How is compliance If a single house requires development approval, then this approval must be obtained prior to
with the R-Codes submitting a certified application for a building permit. A permit authority must not grant a building
Vol. 1 determined permit where development approval is required but has not been obtained. If development approval is
for development not required, the local government would need to establish that the development proposal satisfies all
proposals subject to ‘deemed-to-comply’ requirements of the R-Codes Vol. 1 prior to issuing a building permit.
a certified application
for a building permit?
R-Codes Vol. 1 How do decision- ‘Exercise of judgement’ is linked to ‘discretion’. Judgement and discretion are exercised by the decision-
2.5 makers exercise maker on individual (case-by-case) merit – applying a combination of relevant facts, circumstances and
Exercise of judgement to applicable laws and policies to guide decision-making.
judgement determine if approval
Guidance on how judgement or discretion is to be exercised is outlined in the R-Codes Vol. 1, the
should be granted to a
R-Codes Explanatory Guidelines, local planning schemes, local planning policies and should be
proposal which does
applied in conjuction with broad planning and administrative law principles. Schedule 2, clause 67 of the
not meet R-Codes Vol.
Regulations sets out the matters to be considered in determining a development application.
1 ‘deemed-to-comply’
standards? Local planning policies can also provide clarification/guidance for the R-Codes Vol. 1 ‘design
principles’ by clearly outlining the parameters where discretion would be favourably exercised by the
decision-maker.
The Development Assessment Panel Practice Notes: Making Good Planning Decisions guidelines
on making good planning decisions are available to assist Development Assessment Panels and are
recommended for use by other decision-makers to help in the assessment and determination of
development applications.
3

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 Can a decision- Yes, but only in very limited circumstances. The decision-maker shall not reduce the minimum or
Part D 1.1 – maker approve a average site area per dwelling requirements set out in R-Codes Vol. 1 Table D, except as provided for
Site area development proposal in the R-Codes Vol. 1 or relevant local planning scheme. R-Codes Vol. 1, Part D, 1.1 Site Area, C1.1.3
with a minimum and allows for certain site area adjustments depending upon site location (corner sites and battle-axe sites
average site area per adjoining open areas) and R-Codes Vol. 1, Part D, 1.1, Site Area, C1.1.4 allows for certain site area
dwelling less than the reductions depending upon development type (aged or dependent persons’, single bedroom dwellings,
area required under accessible dwellings or small dwellings), new lots granted WAPC subdivision approval and existing lots
R-Codes Vol. 1 with areas less than that required in R-Codes Vol. 1 Table D.
Table D?
In the case of a local government determining a development application that involves the assessment
of minimum and average lot sizes, adjustments to the minimum and average lot sizes are only permitted
in accordance with R-Codes Vol. 1, Part D, 1.1 Site Area, C1.1.3 of the ‘deemed-to-comply’ criteria.
Only the WAPC has discretion – through the subdivision process – to vary lot sizes under the ‘design
principles’ of R-Codes Vol. 1, Part D, 1.1 Site Area and WAPC Development Control Policy 2.2
Residential Subdivision.
If a minimum site Yes, but only the WAPC may approve a reduction through the subdivision process and only in
area reduction has circumstances where the further proposed reduction can meet the criteria set out under the design
been obtained under principle and relevant WAPC residential subdivision policies. The extent to which the WAPC will exercise
‘deemed to-comply’ its discretion in approving reduced lot sizes for single houses and grouped dwellings below the
R-Codes Vol. 1 Part minimum and average site area requirements, is limited. Further guidance can be found in the WAPC’s
D, 1.1 Site Area , Development Control Policy 2.2 Residential Subdivision.
C1.1.3-C1.1.4, can a
further 5% reduction
be obtained under
design principle
P1.1.2?
Are development Yes, however the WAPC would impose subdivision condition(s) and Certificate of Title notification
concessions for single regarding the use and development of the land for single bedroom dwellings or aged and dependent
bedroom dwellings, persons’ dwellings.
aged and dependent
persons’ dwellings,
accessible dwellings
and small dwellings
under
R-Codes Vol. 1, Part
D, 1.1 Site Area,
C1.1.6 applied to
subdivision?
Does R-Codes Vol. 1, No. R-Codes Vol. 1 1.1 Site Area, C1.4ii allows development on lots with minimum and average site
Part D, 1.1 Site Area, areas less than those set out in R-Codes Vol. 1 Table D, which have previously been granted subdivision
C1.1.4ii allow the approval (including lots yet to be developed).
WAPC to approve any
R-Codes Vol. 1 design principle P1.1.3 provides discretion to the WAPC, in consultation with the local
lot area, regardless
government, to approve the creation of a survey strata or strata (built strata) lot of lesser area than
of the minimum site
required under the relevant R-Coding in Table D, but only for an existing authorised development that
areas in R-Codes Vol.
has been granted all necessary approvals constructed in accordance with those approvals.
1 Table D?
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 Can common property Yes. Common property can be used in
5.1.2 be used in averaging? averaging the primary street setback of a
Street setback dwelling where averaging is permitted.
The access leg for a battle-axe lot cannot
be used for averaging the primary street
setback of the front dwelling because the
access leg is not in common ownership –
it is exclusively owned and forms part of the
lot of the rear dwelling.
DIAGRAM - 1
4

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
Are the setbacks for All required setbacks are to be measured
dwellings that adjoin from the common property boundary, not
a communal street, the edge of the driveway. This includes
right-of-way or shared front setbacks for dwellings that front a
vehicle access way communal street.
measured from the
property boundary
or the edge of the
driveway?
DIAGRAM - 2
How is the setback Where a single house or grouped
assessed for a dwelling in area coded R15 or higher
dwelling that fronts fronts a right-of-way and the right-of-way
a right-of-way? And is the primary street:
how is the setback • the dwelling is to be setback a
assessed for a garage minimum of 2.5 metres;
or carport that fronts a
• with the porch, verandah, balcony
right-of-way?
or equivalent setback a minimum of
1.5 metres; and
• the garage that directly faces a
right-of-way being setback:
– a minimum of 4.5 metres
(Diagram 3A); or
– a minimum of 0.5 metres behind the
dwelling alignment, excluding any
porch, verandah or balcony.
If a carport fronting a right-of-way is DIAGRAM - 3A DIAGRAM - 3B
proposed, the setback may be reduced by
half that of the garage i.e. a minimum of
2.25m garage setback (refer R-Codes Vol. 1
clause 5.1.2, C2.1).
For a single house or grouped dwelling
(including garage or carport) in an area
coded R12.5 or below fronting a right-
of-way, there is no reduced setback
allowance from the right-of-way and so the
standard setback rules at C31.i, C2.1ii and
C2.1iii apply.
Where a dwelling fronts the primary
street and has a rear lot boundary that
abuts a right-of-way (i.e. the right-of-way
is not the primary or secondary street
boundary), the garage or carport setback
may be reduced to nil, provided there is
at least 6 metres in front of the garage or
carport to allow for manoeuvring (Diagram
3B). This applies regardless of the density
coding.
5

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 How is the setback for For the purpose of measuring setback,
5.1.3 verandahs and patios the length of a patio, verandah or similar
Lot boundary assessed? Are they is assessed as a continuation of the wall patio
setback a continuation of the of the dwelling where the patio, verandah
wall of the dwelling or similar is 10 metres or longer in length
or are they measured (Diagram 4A). Where there is a distance of
separately? 4 metres or greater separating the patio,
verandah or similar (that is 10 metres or
longer in length) from the dwelling, the
setbacks shall be assessed independently.
Where a patio, verandah or similar is
10m or less in length and no more than
2.7m in height, it is not to be treated as a primary street
continuation of the dwelling wall and the DIAGRAM - 5A
setback from the boundary can be nil
Diagram 4B).
Setbacks for patios, verandahs or similar
are to be assessed as walls with no major
openings, unless the floor level is elevated
0.5 metres or greater above natural
ground level and in that case, the setback
shall be assessed as a wall with a major
opening.
The above principles for assessing
setbacks to patios, verandahs or similar
applies to both new dwellings as well as
additions.
6
erehw
htgnel
llaw
latoT
htgnel
ni
m01
sdeecxe
oitap
patio Less than 10m
Total wall length
verandah Less than 10m
primary street
DIAGRAM - 4A DDIAIAGGRRAAMM - -5 B4B
On a lot with an No. In order to satisfy the ‘deemed-to-
angled boundary, can comply’ standards of R-Codes Vol. 1 clause
a portion of the wall 5.1.3, the entire length of a wall must be
be setback less than setback the minimum required distance
the required minimum from the boundary, regardless of angled or
if a majority of the irregular shaped lots.
wall length and any
major openings are
setback the minimum
distance?
DIAGRAM - 5
Can walls be built to a Yes. Boundary walls to a common property/strata boundary may satisfy the ‘deemed-to-comply’
common property and/ standards subject to compliance with the boundary wall provisions of R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.1.3, C3.2.
or strata boundary? All walls on or less than 600mm from any site boundary, including common property/strata boundaries
If so, can these walls are assessed as a boundary wall in accordance with R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.1.3, C3.2.
have windows in
Any walls set back greater than 600mm from a common property/strata boundary and/or contain major
them?
openings are required to be setback in accordance with R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.1.3, C3.1.
Boundary walls containing windows not defined as major openings are subject to Building Code of
Australia Standards and such windows shall not be capable of opening so that any part of the window
encroaches over a boundary (i.e. awning windows).

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
How are minor Minor projections may extend up to 0.75
projections such as metres into the setback area as measured
chimneys and eaves from the wall from which they protrude.
referenced at R-Codes For example, a wall required to be setback
Vol. 1 clause 5.1.3, 1.5 metres from a boundary may have
C3.1iv measured? Is it eaves which extend 0.75 metres from the
from the boundary or wall into the setback area, resulting in a
from the wall? 0.75 metres setback from the eaves to the
boundary.
DIAGRAM - 6
In R-Codes Vol. 1 No. In column 7 of R-Codes Vol. 1 Table B, under ‘Other/rear’, ‘*/6’ means the provisions should be read
TableB, are the side consecutively. That is, the ‘other’ side setback is to be determined from R-Codes Vol. 1 Tables 2a or 2b,
and rear boundaries and the ‘rear’ boundary setback is 6 metres. These could only be interchanged by assessment under
set out in column 7 the ‘design principle’. Where only a single setback value is prescribed, it applies to both side and rear
under ‘Other/rear’ boundaries.
interchangeable?
In relation to a gable Yes. In the case of determining the required setback for a gable end or skillion in accordance with
or skillion wall, is R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.1.3, the height of the wall is to be measured from the natural ground level
there a different (NGL) at the lot boundary adjacent to the wall to the highest point of the gable or skillion as illustrated
measure of wall height in Figure 3g. To measure wall height for the purpose of calculating building height, the distance is to be
used for determining taken from where the base of the wall meets the NGL and is to be taken to the highest point of the wall
lot boundary setbacks vertically above that point. The issue of height in relation to gable ends and skillions is more critical than
under R-Codes Vol. 1 for other walls in the calculation of lot boundary setbacks because of the increased potential for impact,
clause 5.1.3, C3.1 and particularly overshadowing of adjoining properties.
R-Codes Vol. 1 Tables
It is important to note that measuring the height of a gable or skillion wall for the purpose of determining
2a and 2b, from that
setbacks is different to the calculation of building height, and the two are separate and distinct design
used in determining
elements of the R-Codes Vol. 1 that are assessed in isolation of one another.
building height under
R-Codes Vol. 1 clause
5.1.6, C6 and R-Codes
Vol. 1 Table 3.
Are boundary Generally, yes, subject to the maximum wall height and the maximum length not exceeding the
walls permitted maximum dimensions specified in R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.1.3, C3.2 and the boundary walls being
anywhere behind limited to a maximum of two site boundaries. Boundary walls must also not exceed the solar access
the front setback limits under R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.4.2 (particularly for north/south facing boundary walls). Additional
line, regardless of walls and/or variations in the dimensional limits may still be considered under the ‘design principles’.
their impact on the
adjoining property?
How do the boundary Boundary walls are defined in Appendix 1 and includes walls either on the site boundary or closer
wall length and height than 600mm between the site boundary and the wall. Any wall or part of a wall set back 600mm or less
limits in R-Codes Vol. from a boundary will be assessed as a boundary wall as per R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.1.3, C3.2.
1 clause 5.1.3 apply
Walls setback greater than 600mm from a site boundary will be assessed in accordance with R-Codes
to buildings set back
Vol. 1 clause 5.1.3, C3.1.
from the boundary
less than the standard
setback distance (i.e.
between the standard
setback and the
boundary)?
Where the side of the Yes. When calculating the setback of the building from the boundary, the boundary wall (if on the
building includes a same boundary) should be included within the total length of the building to that boundary
portion of wall that (refer to Figure 4b of the R-Codes Vol. 1).
is a boundary wall,
The inclusion of the boundary wall within the calculation of the total building length ensures that the
does the setback
setback has regard to the combined impact of both the building and the boundary wall to the adjoining
calculation for the
property.
remainder of the
building, under clause
5.1.3 C3.1i, factor
in the length of the
boundary wall?
7

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 Can the site area No. The truncation cannot be included in the site area for the purpose of calculating open space in
5.1.4 measurement shown accordance with R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.1.4.
Open space at R-Codes Vol. 1
Figure 1a (truncation)
be used when
calculating open
space?
Is the area under Yes. The definition of open space provided
eaves included when at R-Codes Vol. 1 Appendix 1 states that
calculating open areas beneath eaves constitute open
space? space provided it is unenclosed.
DIAGRAM - 7
What is the situation If a patio is enclosed it would become a habitable room as defined at R-Codes Vol. 1 Appendix 1 and
under the R-Codes could not be considered as open space. The patio would have to comply with the relevant R-Code
Vol. 1 when a patio is Vol. 1 and local planning scheme provisions, as well as the relevant requirements of the building code
later proposed to be requirements.
enclosed?
R-Codes Vol. 1 How do you measure The building height requirements of Table
5.1.6 the building height 3 are to be separately applied to each
Building Height of a building with individual part of the roof that reflect the
multiple roof types? relevant roof type (Diagram 8).
For example, where a building in Category B
has a combination of a gable and a hipped A
roof, the gable portion of the roof should not B
exceed 8m while the hipped portion should
not exceed 10m. Gable roof Hipped or pitched roof Hip with gable roof
A - Max. total building height for hipped or pitched roof
B - Max. total building height for gable roof
DIAGRAM - 8
R-Codes Vol. 1 What is the ‘deemed- Notwithstanding the minimum setback
5.2.1 to-comply’ setback for requirement for a garage or a carport
Setback of a garage or a carport under R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.2.1,
garages and (with a boundary wall) boundary walls are assessed as a separate
carport on the boundary? design element regardless of the use
associated with the wall. In accordance
with R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.1.3, C3.2,
boundary walls are only ‘deemed-to-
comply’ when behind the primary street
setback.
* Garages with a boundary wall may come forward of the 4.5m setback requirement of
clause 5.2.1, C1.1 where the garage adjoins a dwelling and the garage is at least 0.5m
behind the dwelling alignment, and the ‘averaging’ primary setback requirements of
clause 5.1.2 C2.1iii are met.
DIAGRAM - 9
8

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 Can a carport be A carport should be entirely open to the front (without a door), sides and rear, except where it is
5.2.1 enclosed on any physically attached to a dwelling or incorporates a boundary wall on one side.
Setback of sides?
Whilst the definition of ‘carport’ references the defined term of ‘unenclosed’ (which allows for permanent
carports and
walls up to two sides), the definition that is specific to ‘carport’ and that limits carports to having one
garages
permanent wall to one side, prevails.
R-Codes Vol. 1 When measuring For the purpose of calculating the width
5.2.2 garage width, is the of a garage in accordance with clause
Garage width width determined 5.2.2, the entire frontage of the garage,
based on just the including piers and supporting structures
garage opening or is to be assessed as the garage width. For
does it include pillars example, a garage with an opening (door)
and supporting of 5.2 metres and with 0.4 metres piers
structures? either side would be assessed as having a
garage width of 6.0 metres.
DIAGRAM - 10
Is there any No. The only allowance made for garages wider than 50% of the lot frontage is where a two-storey
dispensation given dwelling is proposed with an upper floor or balcony above and extending more than half of the width of
to garage width where the garage and its supporting structures, and where the entrance to the dwelling is clearly visible from
a lot is less than 12 the primary street. In these instances, a garage and its supporting structures may extend across up to
metres wide, given 60% of the lot frontage.
the width of a double
For single storey dwellings, the garage width must either be 50% or less of the frontage to satisfy the
garage is 6 metres?
‘deemed-to-comply’ requirements of R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.2.2.
R-Codes Vol. 1 Does the letterbox Yes, a letterbox is required to be located on the same frontage as the entrance to the dwelling, also
5.2.3 need to be on the defined as the primary street. It is important for letterboxes to be located on the primary street as this
Street same frontage as is what is used to assign street numbering. If a letterbox is located on an alternate street frontage, the
surveillance the entrance to the street name would not correlate with the registered property address, resulting in issues with postal and
dwelling? emergency services and more generally, property identity.
Does the entry point The term ‘entry point’ to a dwelling does not just refer to the actual entry (front) door itself; it also
to the dwelling need includes a clearly defined pathway and other design features that identify the entrance to the dwelling.
to face the street Whilst not mandatory for the entry point (including the entry (front) door) to face the street, it must be
to avoid property visible from the street to allow for ease of navigation and surveillance. An entry point that is screened or
confusion? obscured from street view would not satisfy the ‘deemed-to-comply’ standards of R-Codes Vol. 1 clause
5.2.3 and should be avoided to maximise resident, visitor and public safety.
Where a dwelling has two or more street frontages, the primary street is generally determined by the
street to which the entry (front) door faces, meaning by default, the entry point would face the primary
street.
9

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
For a battle-axe lot or Yes. A dwelling must be designed so that
a grouped dwelling at least one major opening faces both the
with access from a street and the approach to the dwelling. It
common driveway, need not be the same major opening but
is a major opening in many cases, a major opening that faces
required to face the the street would also provide surveillance
street as well as of the approach to the dwelling (Diagram
the approach to the 11A).
dwelling?
Where grouped dwellings have sole
access and frontage to a common
property driveway, the term ‘street’ as
defined by the R Codes Vol. 1, includes a
communal street. The dwelling therefore,
need not have a major opening facing a
public street, only the communal street
(Diagram 11B).
DIAGRAM - 11A
DIAGRAM - 11B
10

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 What constitutes Street fences above 1.2 metres in height gaps 50mm or greater
5.2.4 ‘visually permeable’ are required to be visually permeable in
Street walls and for the purpose of order to satisfy the ‘deemed-to-comply’
fences assessing fencing standards of R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.2.4.
material above This type of fencing is commonly referred to
1.2 metres in height? as ‘open style’ and allows for surveillance
from the dwelling to the street (and vice
versa) and assists to reduce unsightly and
bulky solid front fences which attract graffiti
and vandalism, and reduce property safety.
In accordance with the definition in R-Codes
Vol. 1 Appendix 1, a visually permeable
front fence, as viewed directly from the
street, has either:
• continuous vertical or horizontal gaps
of 50 millimetres or greater width
gaps less than 50mm
occupying not less than one third of the
total surface area
• continuous vertical or horizontal gaps
less than 50 millimetres in width,
occupying at least one half of the total
surface area in aggregate
• a surface offering equal or lesser
obstruction to view
Further, pillars that do not exceed 1.8
metres in height and with horizontal
dimensions not greater than 400
millimetres by 400 millimetres are accepted
as part of the deemed-to-comply fence
profile where they are separated by a
section of visually permeable fence.
11
m2.1
3\1
muminim
elbaemrep
yllausiv
or
m2.1
eb
ot
slenap
llfini
elbaemrep
yllausiv
)denfied
sa(
DIAGRAM - 12
Is there any maximum Where a fence is located within a 1.5 metres truncation of where a driveway intersects the front
overall height for property boundary or where two streets intersect, the fence is not permitted to be greater than 0.75
visually permeable metres in height regardless of whether it is visually permeable or not.
fencing along the
Outside of this circumstance, the fence pillars are not to exceed 1.8 metres in height, however visually
primary street
permeable infill components of the fence are not subject to a height restriction.
frontage?
Front fencing standards may be varied by way of local planning policy, prepared by the decision-maker,
which may alter the overall height of the visually permeable section of fencing and/or may reduce the
maximum 1.2 metre height standard for the solid section or the 1.8 metre height standard for the
pillars.
The relevant local government may also have local laws or other local planning policies or local
development plans relating to fencing which limit maximum overall height.
R-Codes Vol. 1 Would a visually No. In accordance with the ‘deemed-to-comply’ standards of R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.2.5, no structures
5.2.5 permeable structure above 0.75 metres in height whether visually permeable or not are permitted within 1.5 metres of a
Sight lines above 0.75 metres vehicle access point where a driveway meets a public street and where the two streets intersect.
in height and within
1.5 metres of vehicle
access points satisfy
the ‘deemed-to-
comply’ standards of
R-Codes Vol. 1 clause
5.2.5?

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 Are there any limits R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.2.6, C6 refers to the appearance of the retained dwelling being upgraded
5.2.6 to the upgrading of externally to an equivalent maintenance standard of the new or rest of the development. This suggests
Appearance an existing dwelling, any required works should be limited to maintenance rather than any additional development (for
of retained under R-Codes Vol. 1 example, re-cladding/re-roofing of the existing dwelling to match the new or rest of the development).
dwelling clause 5.2.6, C6, when However, a local planning policy may be made by the decision-maker to amend or replace the ‘deemed-
retained as part of to-comply’ provisions under R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.2.6 C6 to clearly outline upgrading
a grouped dwelling standards/requirements.
development?
How is R-Codes Clause 5.2.6 C6 applies where an existing dwelling that is proposed to be a grouped dwelling is
Vol. 1 clause 5.2.6, located within the parent lot of the development.
C6 applied where
There is no scope to apply a condition requiring upgrading of an existing grouped dwelling once the
subdivision precedes
title to the property containing this dwelling has been separated from that of the development site/
development?
parent lot.
Where the subdivision is of a type that proposes for an existing dwelling to be retained as a single
house, clause 5.2.6 C6 would technically not apply. However, the WAPC may impose a condition of
subdivision approval requiring that the retained dwelling comply with the requirements of the R-Codes
Vol. 1, for example, the provision of parking spaces to satisfy 5.3.3 C3.1.
R-Codes Vol. 1 Is the two-thirds Only two-thirds of the minimum required
5.3.1 uncovered outdoor living area defined at R-Codes
Outdoor living outdoor living Vol. 1 Table B is required to be uncovered to
areas area requirement satisfy the ‘deemed-to-comply’ standards of
determined based on R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.3.1. If an outdoor
the physical area of living area is proposed that exceeds the
a proposed outdoor minimum requirement, then a proponent
living area or only the does not need to provide additional
minimum required uncovered space.
outdoor living area as
For example, a dwelling on an R20 coded
defined at R-Codes
lot must provide an outdoor living area
Vol. 1 Table B?
that has 20m² of uncovered space. If an
DIAGRAM - 13
applicant proposes an outdoor living area
that has a total area of 50m², the dwelling
would still only need to provide 20m² of
that area as uncovered space to satisfy the
‘deemed-to-comply’ standards of R-Codes
Vol. 1 clause 5.3.1.
What is ‘permanent Any solid roof material designed to provide constant shade or shelter constitutes ‘permanent roof cover’
roof cover’ and what and includes common materials such as tiles, various forms of metal, perspex or plastic roof sheeting.
constitutes being As a general rule, any roof material that is fixed, permanent and impermeable to water is considered to
‘without permanent be ‘permanent roof cover’.
roof cover’?
The term ‘non-permanent roof cover’ refers to construction materials that are designed to be operated
by the resident so that they can be either open or closed. Examples of this include louvered roofs that
can be angled so as to allow light and water to penetrate or closed to provide shade and shelter. The
same principle would also apply to retractable roofs which would also be considered ‘non-permanent
roof cover’.
Can an outdoor living To satisfy the ‘deemed-to-comply’ requirements of R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.3.1, C1.1, an outdoor
area, required under living area must be behind the primary street setback. This line is to be drawn parallel to the primary
R-Codes Vol. 1 clause street boundary at the prescribed minimum primary street setback distance at R-Codes Vol. 1
5.3.1, C1.1, be situated Table B. However, under the ‘design principles’, an application could be made to locate the required
in the front setback outdoor living area within or partly within the street setback area, particularly where it faces north.
area?
R-Codes Vol.1 Can the tree planting Yes, although it must be located within the uncovered portion and free of impervious surfaces.
5.3.2 area requirement at
Landscaping clause 5.3.2 C2.2 be
located within the
outdoor living area?
12

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 If a grouped dwelling No, because there is not four or more dwellings being served by a communal driveway. Developments
5.3.3 development that have four or more dwellings with access from a communal driveway are to provide visitor parking
Parking containing six at the following rates:
dwellings has three
4 dwellings = 1 visitor bays
dwellings using a
communal driveway 5-8 dwellings = 2 visitor bays
and three dwellings
each individually
9-12 dwellings = 3 visitor bays
gaining access 13-16 dwellings = 4 visitor bays, and so forth.
directly from a public
road, is there any
requirement for visitor
parking?
R-Codes Vol. 1 Where a driveway No. The entire access leg including the driveway and 0.5 metre landscaping strips must be wholly
5.3.5 is located within a located within common property. Allocating a 0.5 metre landscaping strip for the exclusive use of a lot
Vehicular access common property is considered to not be appropriate as the landscape strip cannot be used for any meaningful purpose
access leg, can by the occupants of the dwelling on the lot to which it is assigned. The landscape strip also commonly
a portion of the performs a utility services (power, water and sewer) role.
0.5 metre wide
landscaped strip
either side of the
driveway be allocated
for the exclusive use
of a strata lot?
Under R-Codes Vol. The point of reference is not defined in the R-Codes Vol. 1, however the street corner is considered
1 clause 5.3.5 C5.3 to be the point at which the road alignment begins to deviate towards the intersecting road. Under
a 6 metre separation Australian Standard (AS) 2890.1, a 6 metre separation distance is defined with reference to the corner
is required between truncation or the point at which the carriageway begins to deviate. The intent of this clause is to limit
the driveway and traffic conflict and AS 2890.1 should be used as a suitable reference.
the street corner or
(Refer to Figure 3.1 in AS 2890.1 for a representation of prohibited driveway locations within proximity
the point at which a
to street corners).
carriageway begins
to deviate. From
what point is this
measured?
Under clause 5.3.5 The driveway width requirements under R-Codes Vol. 1 clauses 5.3.5, C5.2-C5.6 relate to the width of
various driveway the paved/hardstand vehicle access way as per the definition of driveway in R-Codes Vol. 1 Appendix 1.
widths are required.
R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.3.5, C5.3 requires a 0.5 metre setback to a side lot boundary or street pole
What standards apply?
and this is applicable to both sides of the driveway where it is located between two lot boundaries.
The width of access legs is also limited by the WAPC’s Development Control Policy 2.2 Residential
Subdivision.
R-Codes Vol. 1 Are privacy screens Yes, if they form part of the building. However, screening that does not take the form of a building
5.4.1 subject to the (as defined) will not generally be subject to standard setback requirements (for example, pergolas).
Visual privacy setbacks applicable to It is possible to utilise boundary fencing as a privacy screen, subject to the requirements of the Dividing
buildings? Fences Act 1961 and any relevant local laws relating to fencing. These often involve consultation
with adjacent owners where fencing exceeds a particular height. Care needs to be taken not to
impose conditions requiring screen fencing or accept a proposal for such screening in the absence of
agreement from the adjoining neighbour.
Does the cone of No, R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.4.1, C1.1 refers only to those areas of another residential property behind
vision and associated its primary street setback (i.e. the primary street setback of the property being overlooked).
visual privacy
requirements apply
to the street setback
area?
Can visual privacy Yes, but only by the decision-maker through the application of relevant ‘design principles’ and
standards be varied consultation with adjoining owners/occupiers.
where both affected
properties can
benefit?
13

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 How should dividing There is no recognition of partial shadowing under R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.4.2, C2.1. Where such
5.4.2 fences, translucent a situation arises, it should be identified in the shadow calculations, as translucent materials and
Solar access for materials and screening still casts a shadow. The ‘design principles’ allow for variation and the extent and impact of
adjoining sites screening of outdoor any partial shadowing in excess of the ‘deemed-to-comply’ requirements. Level of translucency can be
areas be assessed taken into consideration under the ‘design principles’.
for the purposes of
As per the note below Clause 5.4.2 C2.1, any shadow cast by a dividing fence up to 2m in height is
shadow calculations
to be not included for the purposes of ‘deemed-to-comply’ shadow calculation and/or any ‘design
under R-Codes Vol. 1
principle’ assessment.
clause 5.4.2, where
the screening results
in partial shadowing
of the adjoining
property?
Are there any potential The BCA and R-Codes Vol. 1 should be complementary. The R-Codes Vol. 1 address solar access in
conflicts between the respect of adjoining sites and, in particular, seek to minimise the potential for new development to
R-Codes Vol. 1 and overshadow north facing major openings to habitable rooms and roof mounted solar collectors. House/
the Building Code building energy efficiency is addressed in the BCA.
of Australia’s (BCA)
energy efficiency
requirements?
R-Codes Vol. 1 Is habitable floor No. An outbuilding is specifically defined in the R-Codes Vol. 1 to include an enclosed non-habitable
5.4.3 space, provided in the structure and therefore a free standing building containing habitable room(s) is not subject to R-Code
Outbuildings form of a separate Vol. 1 provisions applicable to outbuildings. It would be deemed either as a second grouped dwelling,
building from the main an ancillary dwelling or a detached extension to a single house and subject to other provisions of the
dwelling, classified R-Codes Vol. 1.
as an outbuilding and
therefore subject to
area and height limits
provided for under
R-Codes Vol. 1 clause
5.4.3, C3?
R-Codes Vol. 1 Under R-Codes Vol. Yes, there is an element of discretion involved in the assessment of compliance with this clause. Where
5.4.4 1 clause 5.4.4, C4.3, the decision-maker is of the opinion that the particular fixture is not visually obtrusive, it should approve
External fixtures external fixtures other the application, and where not, it may consider the proposal in terms of the ‘design principles’, with the
than those referred option of undertaking neighbour consultation.
to in R-Codes Vol. 1
clause 5.4.4, C4.1
and 4.2 will meet the
requirements where
they are ‘located so
as not to be visually
obtrusive’. Does
this determination
involve the exercise
of discretion and if
so, does the local
government have the
power to refuse such
applications?
Do external water Yes, rainwater storage tanks are included in the definition of external fixtures. R-Codes Vol. 1 clause
tanks classify as 5.4.4, C4.3 requires that they are not visible from the primary street or are designed to integrate with
external fixtures? If the building or located so as not to be visually obtrusive. However, it is important to appreciate that
so, are they required external fixtures constitute a structure under the definition of a building under the R-Codes Vol. 1 and
to be set back in still need to meet the relevant setback and height requirements applicable to buildings.
accordance with
normal wall setbacks?
14

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 Now the family Any development approval conditions regarding ancillary dwelling occupancy continue to apply until
5.5.1 occupancy restriction superseded by a subsequent development approval. In addition, any notification on title, covenant
Ancillary for ancillary dwellings or other similar restrictions regarding ancillary dwelling occupancy would continue to apply unless
dwellings has been removed removed in conjunction with an amendment to the development approval to amend/remove the relevant
under the R-Codes condition. The WAPC would support removal of occupancy restrictions not consistent with the R-Codes
Vol. 1, what Vol. 1, however landowners should obtain their own advice and liaise with the decision-maker to
happens to existing ascertain the appropriate means of removal.
development/
approvals that have
the restriction as a
condition of planning
approval and/or as
a notification on the
Certificate of Title?
Can more than one No, only one ancillary dwelling can be provided on the same site as the primary dwelling.
ancillary dwelling be
provided on a lot?
Must the owner reside No, the single house and the ancillary dwelling may be occupied by any person(s), at the
in either the single owner’s choice.
house or the ancillary
Further information on ancillary dwelling occupancy is available online at
dwelling?
www.commerce.wa.gov.au
R-Codes Vol. 1 Under R-Codes Yes, provided the occupation of the dwellings complies with the requirements for the respective classes
5.5.2 Vol. 1 clause 5.5.2, of dwelling (for example, aged 55 or over in the case of Aged Persons’ Dwellings).
Aged and C2.1, the maximum
dependant internal floor area for
person’s Aged and Dependant
dwellings Persons’ Dwellings
is 100m² (80m² for
Multiple Dwellings).
Can these limits be
exceeded through
the application of the
‘design principles’?
Are the adaptable Yes, under R-Codes Vol. 1 clause 5.5.2, C2.3 and 2.4 all dwellings are required to be constructed
housing requirements using the identified adaptable house requirements set out in AS 4299.
set out in AS 4299,
The ‘design principles’ only require that they are ‘designed to meet the needs of aged or dependant
mandatory for all
persons’. However, there is an expectation that all dwellings for ‘aged and dependant persons’ meet
aged and dependant
AS 4299.
persons’ dwellings?
15

Residential Design Codes – practice notes
R-Codes clause Query/matter Response/interpretation Diagram/illustration (where relevant)
R-Codes Vol. 1 Is a free standing Yes. A free standing garage is defined and assessed as an outbuilding. If habitable space forms part
Appendix 1 garage an of the freestanding/detached structure, it is not considered an outbuilding or garage.
– Definitions outbuilding?
What is the difference These terms are defined in R-Codes Vol. 1 Appendix 1. The main difference is a verandah is a roofed
between a patio, open platform attached to a dwelling while a patio or pergola may or may not be attached. Also, while
verandah and a both a patio and pergola are unenclosed, a patio is covered in a water impermeable material whereas
pergola? a pergola is an unroofed, open-framed structure that is uncovered or covered in a water permeable
material (for example, shade cloth).
In the definition of Stairs not common to two or more dwellings are included in the calculation of the plot ratio as they
‘plot ratio area’ are comprise the gross total area of the building (dwelling). The exclusion relates to stairs and landings
stairs that are not common to more than one dwelling (i.e. lift shafts, shared stairs and stair landings).
common to two or
more dwellings (for
example, internal or
external stairs serving
a single dwelling)
included or excluded
from the calculation of
the plot ratio?
16