Local Planning
Policy 2.27
Unhosted Short-term
Rental Accommodation
fremantle.wa.gov.au

Unhosted Short-Term Rental
Accommodation
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. This policy may be cited as Local Planning
Policy 2.27 – Unhosted Short-term Rental Accommodation (LPP 2.27).
Introduction
The purpose of this policy is to establish a clear framework to manage unhosted short-
term rental accommodation within the City of Fremantle. The policy seeks to balance the
tourism benefits with residential amenity and urban living, ensuring development and land
use aligns with neighbourhood character while not detrimentally impacting the viability of
an area through the overabundance of temporary residents.
Objectives
The objectives of this policy are to:
1. To ensure unhosted short-term rental accommodation is designed, sited and
managed to preserve amenity and character of areas with heritage, environmental
or conservations values.
2. To maintain the amenity and established character of zones by ensuring the
location, scale, design and operation of unhosted short-term rental accommodation
is appropriate to the setting.
3. To ensure unhosted short-term rental accommodation is appropriately serviced to
meet the needs of visitors and prevent detrimental impacts on the local
environment or infrastructure.
4. To ensure the vibrancy and viability of zones, particularly the City Centre zone, is
maintained by retaining a base of predominantly permanent residents.
Application of this Policy
This policy applies to all unhosted short-term rental accommodation, as defined in the
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015, within the scheme
area, except if the dwelling is:
a. registered under the Short-Term Rental Accommodation Act 2024 Part 3; and
b. used as unhosted short-term rental accommodation for no more than 90 nights
(cumulative) in a relevant 12-month period.
1/5

Where this policy is inconsistent with the Scheme or an adopted structure plan or local
development plan, that instrument shall prevail to the extent of any inconsistency. Where
this policy is inconsistent with a more general local planning policy, this policy shall prevail
to the extent of that inconsistency.
Unhosted short-term rental accommodation which is registered under the Short-Term
Rental Accommodation Act 2024, Part 3, prior to 9 January 2026 are considered existing
non-conforming uses, meaning no planning approval is required to continue this land use
at the property under the same landowner.
Policy Provisions
1. Built Form and Site Appearance
1.1 Proposals for unhosted short-term rental accommodation must align with the
applicable Residential Design Codes (R-Codes), Local Planning Scheme, Local
Development Plans and any location specific local planning policies.
1.2 On-site signage is required for all proposals and is:
a) Limited to sign plaques or plates affixed to the main frontage of the building.
b) To not exceed 0.5m² per dwelling.
c) To be consolidated where multiple unhosted short-term rental accommodation
units are contained on a site.
d) To include the property owner or manager’s contact information.
2. Car Parking
2.1 For all zones, except the City Centre Zone - In addition to providing car parking in
accordance with the Residential Design Codes, additional on-site car parking bays
should be provided at a rate of one bay for every two bedrooms exceeding four
bedrooms (i.e. one additional bay for 5-6 bedrooms, two additional bays for 7-8
bedrooms etc).
2.2 City Centre Zone – The City Centre is a pedestrian friendly location with plentiful
retail and dining options within walking distance, close to many of the City’s tourist
attractions and is well serviced by public transport. Therefore, there is no
requirement for the provision of on-site parking within this zone.
3. Dwelling Occupancy
3.1 Single Dwelling - Maximum occupancy of no more than 2 persons per bedroom,
excluding persons under 16, to a maximum of 12 persons per dwelling.
2/5

3.2 Grouped and Multiple Dwellings - Maximum occupancy of no more than two
persons per bedroom, excluding persons under 16, to a maximum of six persons.
3.3 Rooms not originally designed as bedrooms (e.g. living / dining rooms) cannot be
converted for STRA occupancy calculations.
Note: Where occupancy of more than six persons is proposed, additional health
requirements may apply such as the provision of smoke alarms in every bedroom. Please
contact the City’s Environmental Health Team for additional advice.
4. Location Requirements
4.1 In order to prioritise permanent residents within the City Centre Zone so as to
retain a lively and vibrant centre throughout the year, consideration will be given
to the number of hosted and unhosted short term rental accommodation properties
registered at the time of the development application being lodged.
5. Servicing Considerations
5.1 Development is to be connected to a reticulated potable water supply.
5.2 Development is to be connected to a reticulated sewage or serviced by an
approved on-site effluent disposal system with adequate capacity for the proposed
number of occupants.
6. Time Limitations of Approvals
6.1 Development approval may be limited to a period of 12 months where Council
deems it appropriate to properly assess the impact on neighbours and amenity.
7. Restriction of Operator
7.1 Due to the detailed management measures required to operate an unhosted short-
term rental accommodation in accordance with this policy, development approval
for unhosted short-term rental accommodation is restricted to the approved
landowner and will not run with the property. A change in landowner will require a
new development applicant for unhosted short-term rental accommodation to be
submitted and approved.
8. Management Plans and Other Unhosted Short-Term Rental Accommodation
Application Requirements
3/5

8.1 Where a unhosted short-term rental accommodation is located on a strata title, a
letter from the Strata Manager or Strata Management Company in support of the
proposed use is to be included with the development application.
8.2 For proposals located in all zones except the City Centre zone, a site plan indicating
the location of on-site parking is to be provided with the development application.
8.3 Development applications must include a Management Plan detailing the following:
a) Contact details (phone number and email address) of the Property Manager,
which may be the landowner or an external agent. The Property Manager is to
respond to nuisance behaviour within 12 hours of a complaint.
b) Method of booking and checking in.
c) Confirmation of location of designated on-site / visitor parking bays.
d) Whether pets will be permitted at the property, if so, whether they are
permitted to be left unattended.
e) Complaint management procedures addressing nuisance behaviour which may
include:
• Violence or threats
• Loud aggressive behaviour, including yelling, screaming or arguing
• Excessively loud noise nuisance
• Overlooking
• Light spill
• Barking dogs
• Smoke or odours.
f) Waste management strategies to ensure appropriate disposal.
g) Bushfire emergency response procedures (in designated bushfire prone areas).
8.4 A detailed Code of Conduct is to be made available to all occupants and included
with the development application. The Code of Conduct is to include the following:
a) Contact details of the Property Manager, including after-hours contact details.
b) Expected behaviour of occupants / visitor to minimise impact on neighbours.
c) Any restrictions of visitors or parties/ events.
d) Location of on-site car parking for occupants / visitors, as well as any parking
restrictions applicable to the location.
e) Details of alternate transport options, such as public transport.
f) Details regarding waste management, including specific expectations of guests
regarding waste disposal and bin collection.
g) Whether pets will be permitted at the property, if so, whether they are
permitted to be left unattended.
h) Bushfire emergency response procedures (where applicable).
i) Any other information relevant to the use of the property which may impact the
amenity of the location.
4/5

Definitions
The following definition of terms used in the policy apply in addition to those in Planning
and Development Act, Short Term Rental Accommodation Act, and subsidiary regulations,
and City of Fremantle Local Planning Scheme No.4.
Designated bushfire prone areas means the land designated by an order made under
the Fire and Emergency Services Act 1998 section 18P as a bush fire prone area.
Hosted short-term rental accommodation is defined as in Schedule 2 clause 1 of the
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015.
Unhosted short-term rental accommodation is defined as in Schedule 2 clause 1 of
the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. For ease of
reference, the definition states it is not hosted short-term rental accommodation and
accommodates a maximum of 12 people per night.
Responsibility and review information
Responsible officer: Manager City Planning
Document Ordinary Meeting of Council - 13 August 2025 – C2508-8
adoption/approval details
Document amendment
details
Next review date 13 August 2029
(plus 4 years)
5/5