Amenity
This document outlines the assessment of amenity impacts for proposed development in the City of
Melville. This policy is applicable to residential, commercial and mixed use developments within the
City of Melville.
If you are searching for general information in relation to planning requirements, please refer to the
Planning Services page of our website https://www.melvillecity.com.au/ or alternatively you can
speak to one of our planning officers either on the phone, 9364 066 or in person at 10 Almondbury
Road, Booragoon during business hours, 8.30am – 5:00pm Monday to Friday
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP1.10
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 17 March 2026
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development (Local
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (Regulations) and the City of Melville Local Planning Scheme
No. 6 (LPS No.6). This Local Planning Policy may be cited as Local Planning Policy No. 1.10 –
Amenity (LPP1.10).
Policy Objectives
The objectives of this policy are:
• To ensure that when new development is proposed, due consideration is given to the
preservation of reasonable amenity for occupiers of adjoining properties and the surrounding
area;
• To provide guidance on discretionary land uses within the residential zone where there is
greater likelihood of amenity impact;
• To provide guidance in the consideration of amenity impacts arising from proposals seeking a
performance assessment under the R-Codes; and
• To provide assistance in the consideration of all planning applications against the amenity
provisions contained within the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015 (the Regulations).
Policy Scope
When dealing with Development Applications, the assessment undertaken must have regard to the
potential amenity impacts that may result from the development proposed.
In this context, and in respect of residential developments, the Design Principles and the Element
Objectives cited throughout the R-Codes promote the need to consider amenity in relation to the
impacts that may result from development.
The Regulations also includes general consideration of amenity which all development applications
must be assessed against prior to any approval being issued.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 8/04/2026 11:15 AM Page 1 of 4
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Definitions / Abbreviations Used In Policy
Amenity for the purposes of this policy is defined as follows:
Means all those factors which combine to form the character of an area and include the present and
likely future amenity.
LPS6 City of Melville Local Planning Scheme No. 6
R-Codes Residential Design Codes Volume 1 and Volume 2
Regulations Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
Amenity As per the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
which states as follows:
means all those factors which combine to form the character of an area and include
the present and likely future amenity;
Policy Statement
1 Amenity Impact Statements
1.1 Where a proposal does not satisfy the provisions of LPS6, Local Planning Policies, the
Deemed-to-Comply provisions or Acceptable Outcomes of the R-Codes, the decision maker
is required to exercise judgement in undertaking a performance assessment to determine
whether the proposal is acceptable taking into account the objectives and provisions of LPS6,
the objectives and provisions of R-Codes, the objectives and provisions of Council policies
and orderly and proper planning.
1.2 In relation to Single Houses and Grouped Dwellings, the R-Codes requires that a written
justification be submitted where assessment against one or more of the R-Code Design
Principles is required or sought. In addition, where a development proposal includes
variations to the provisions contained in LPS6 and Local Planning Policies, a similar written
justification may be required. This written justification would be in the form of an Amenity
Impact Statement.
In relation to apartment development, a design statement of how the proposal meets the
objectives of the R-Codes would be necessary.
1.3 In addition to the above, where a proposal satisfies the relevant provisions contained within
LPS6, the R-Codes and Local Planning Policy, the City may still require the submission of an
Amenity Impact Statement where it is considered that the proposal has the potential to result
in significant impacts upon the amenity of an adjoining property or the surrounding locality.
Applicants will be advised of their obligations in respect of the latter on a case by case basis,
taking into consideration the individual merits of development being proposed.
1.4 Amenity Impact Statements must:
(a) Incorporate a context analysis for the locality prepared by a suitably qualified and/or
experienced planning, architectural or urban design professional.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 8/04/2026 11:15 AM Page 2 of 4
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

(i) For residential development, this is to be undertaken in accordance with the
requirements of the R-Codes.
(ii) For non-residential and other residential development (such as aged care or
student accommodation), the context analysis is to be based upon the adopted
local planning framework for the locality.
(iii) For non-residential and other residential development (such as aged care or
student accommodation) within the residential zone, the context analysis is to be
based on the residential character of the area including (but not limited to) the
expected noise and traffic levels which could be expected within a residential area
–not just compliance with the Environmental Protection (Nosie) Regulations 1997
and capacity of the local road network;
(b) Demonstrate how the proposed development satisfies the performance criteria of the
R-Codes or objectives of LPS6, Local Planning Strategy and relevant local planning
policies;
(c) Demonstrate that consideration has been given in the design of the development to the
impact on the amenity of adjacent properties and/or the locality; and
(d) Outline the measures that are proposed to be employed to remove or mitigate any
adverse impacts that might result from the development. Consideration must be given
to both residential and visual amenity impacts.
1.5 An Amenity Impact Statement may be supported by illustrative information including
photographs, photo montages, sketches and models.
2 Assessment of Amenity
2.1 In considering what is amenity to understand the impact of a proposal, it is important to
capture the existing development and land use context of an area to determine likely impact
of a change. Whilst noting that the legal definition of amenity is broad, there is significant
case law which may be of assistance in the assessment of the proposal in addition to the
below.
2.2 In considering the impact of a proposed development on the amenity of an adjoining property
and/or the surrounding locality, the City may have regard to any factor relevant to the amenity
of the adjoining property and/or the surrounding locality and the impact of the proposed
development upon that amenity including but not limited to:
• Access to daylight and ventilation to major openings;
• Access to direct sunlight and ventilation to outdoor living areas;
• The sense of confinement resulting from cumulative building bulk;
• The location of existing trees and vegetation;
• Access to views of significance;
• The difference in ground levels between the sites;
• Articulation of the elevations in terms of varied setbacks, design features, building
materials and treatments;
• Impact upon the existing streetscape;
• Degree to which the development reflects the scale of the existing built form within
the streetscape;
• The amount of open space around buildings;
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 8/04/2026 11:15 AM Page 3 of 4
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

• The design and external appearance, including exterior cladding of any new building
or addition and its effect on the amenity of existing buildings and the area generally;
• Any other site specific characteristics on the adjoining properties or within the
surrounding area;
• The future likely land uses and development that the planning frameworks applicable
permit and/or encourage; and
• Any other relevant aspects of the character of the adjoining property and/or the
surrounding area (as the case may be) that may be affected by the proposed
development.
3 Design Review Group
3.1 Where a proposal is considered to have the potential to result in a significant adverse impact
upon the adjoining properties or locality, the City may refer the application and amenity
impact statement to the City’s Design Review Panel for consideration.
3.2 The consideration of the application by the City’s Design Review Group will be undertaken
in accordance with the City’s Design Review policy
References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No.6
Residential Design Codes Volume 1 and Residential
Design Codes Volume 2 - Apartments
Delegated Authority No: DA-020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/09/11 P11/3246
REVIEWS
Ordinary Meeting of Council 18/03/14 P14/3471
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/05/14 P14/3497
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/09/16 P16/3718
Administrative Review 6/08/2019
(Council Resolution 18/6/2019)
Ordinary Meeting of Council 17/03/2026 UP25/96
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 8/04/2026 11:15 AM Page 4 of 4
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.