August 2016
DC Policy
1.10
- Freeway service centres and
roadhouses, including signage

Development Control Policy 1.10
- Freeway service centres and roadhouses,
including signage
August 2016
Contents
Background 3
1. Introduction 4
2. Policy objectives 5
3. Policy measures for freeway service
centres and roadhouses 6
3.1 Locational measures 6
3.2 Siting measures 7
3.3 Design measures, including signage 7
4. Implementing the policy 9
5. Definitions 10
Appendix 1:
Map of Proposed 2031 Freeway Network
– Perth and Peel Region 11
Appendix 2:
WAPC policies and guidelines to be read in
conjunction with Development Control Policy 1.10 12
Disclaimer
This document has been published by the © State of Western Australia website: www.planning.wa.gov.au
Western Australian Planning Commission. email: corporate@planning.wa.gov.au
Any representation, statement, opinion Published by the
or advice expressed or implied in this Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 9000
publication is made in good faith and on the Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
basis that the government, its employees 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
and agents are not liable for any damage or Perth WA 6000 infoline: 1800 626 477
loss whatsoever which may occur as a result Locked Bag 2506 This document is available in alternative
of action taken or not taken, as the case Perth WA 6001 formats on application to Communication
may be, in respect of any representation, Services.
statement, opinion or advice referred to Published August 2016
herein. Professional advice should be
obtained before applying the information
contained in this document to particular
circumstances.
2 Western Australian Planning Commission - DC Policy 1.10 - August 2016

Background
This policy supersedes the Western Australian Decision-makers should also have due regard
Planning Commission (WAPC) Development to Main Roads WA legislation, strategies,
Control Policy 1.10 - Location and Design of policies and guidelines that relate to this
Freeway Service Centres (August 2001). It policy, including:
reflects the wider freeway network and the
• Main Roads Act 1930
changing road user environment including
greater general and freight traffic. The policy • Main Roads (Control of Advertisements)
also includes provisions for service stations, Regulations 1996
(commonly known as ‘roadhouses’ in regional
• Policy and guidelines for the provision of
areas) on other State roads. The policy does
freeway service centres 2011
not apply to service stations other than
• Freeway service centre strategy 2015
freeway service centres and roadhouses.
• Policy and application guidelines for
Service centres for the convenience and advertising signs within and beyond
amenity of the travelling public contribute State road reserves 2015
to road safety by providing the opportunity
• Rural highways service centre (roadhouse)
for rest breaks to reduce driver fatigue. This
guidelines 2015
policy provides guidance for decision-making
on the location, siting and design of service
centres on freeways and roadhouses on other
State roads.
Other WAPC planning policies and
guidelines may contain relevant provisions or
advice and should be read in conjunction with
this policy where appropriate (see Appendix
2).
In addition to the provisions of these policies
and guidelines, decision-makers should have
due regard to the provisions of:
• regional planning schemes, strategies and
structure plans; and
• local planning strategies, schemes and
policies.
Western Australian Planning Commission - DC Policy 1.10 - August 2016 3

1 Introduction When this policy applies
This policy applies to proposals for freeway
Perth’s freeway network is expanding beyond
service centres and roadhouses, including
the Perth metropolitan and Peel regions into
associated signage, located on State roads.
adjoining peri-urban and rural areas, where
freeway service centres may be located further
apart and access may be less convenient. In The WAPC will apply this policy when
the State’s other regions, the volume of traffic, considering:
including freight, has increased as a result of
• an amendment to a regional or local
population and economic growth.
planning scheme;
• a structure plan;
Road safety is a major concern with fatigue
a large contributor to vehicle crashes and • a development application.
road deaths. Due to the efficiency of modern
vehicles, the distance between service Applications for development of a freeway
stations is dictated more by travellers’ needs service centre or roadhouse, including
to address fatigue and personal comfort associated signage, located on land zoned
(toilets and food), than the need to refuel. Fuel under a region scheme are considered by
remains a factor in trip planning in remote the WAPC where the local government is of
regions. the opinion that the application is of State
or regional importance or is in the public
Freeway service centres are reasonably close interest, or where the local government does
to services and facilities available within urban not accept the referral advice of the advice
areas and the range of services provided are agency.
limited to those specified in the definition of a
freeway service centre in this policy. The Department of Planning will apply
this policy when responding to referral
Roadhouses in regional areas may need to requests from local government (acting
provide services that are generally provided under delegation from the WAPC) regarding
in townsites for local residents, as well as development applications for freeway service
services to meet the needs of travellers. centres and roadhouses, including associated
signage, on land reserved under a region
They may sell a wider variety of goods and scheme as a regional road, or on zoned land
provide a full range of automotive services abutting a regional road reservation. Where
and accommodation; and more extensive the local government does not accept the
ablution facilities for the travelling public Department of Planning or other advice
and professional drivers, depending on the agencies’ recommendations, the WAPC will
remoteness of the location. Roadhouses may consider the application and apply this policy.
be located at or near existing settlements,
while in remote regions they may be stand- Where a local government considers an
alone centres which function as regional application for a freeway service centre
activity nodes. or roadhouse under an instrument of
delegation conferred under the Planning and
Throughout this policy, the term ‘service Development Act 2005, the local government
centres’ refers to both freeway service centres shall have due regard to this policy as well as
and roadhouses. The term ‘signage’ refers to to other relevant policies and guidelines of
signage located at service centres; it does not the WAPC and Main Roads WA.
include signage advertising service centres
but located elsewhere along the roadside.
4 Western Australian Planning Commission - DC Policy 1.10 - August 2016

Where proposals for roadhouses on roads
2 Policy objectives
other than State roads require an amendment
to a local planning scheme, the WAPC may 1. To address the needs of those
assess the proposal against the objectives of travelling on Western Australia’s
this policy. freeways and other State
roads with respect to safety,
Where the Department of Transport convenience, amenity and the
(DoT), acting under an instrument of provision of tourist information.
delegation conferred under the Planning
2. To ensure that service centres are
and Development Act 2005, considers an
located and sited in a manner that
application for large format digital signage
supports local economies and the
on or abutting land reserved as a Primary
movement of State and regional
Regional Road under the Metropolitan
freight.
Region Scheme, DoT should have regard to
Development Control Policy 5.4 Advertising
3. To ensure that service centres are
on Reserved Land and refer the application
sited to conform to Main Roads
to the relevant local government and Main
WA’s standards for safe vehicular
Roads WA for advice. This policy does not
entry and exit between the
apply.
roadway and service centres.
4. To ensure that service centres
are sited where they will not
have an adverse impact on the
environment or landscape.
5. To ensure that service centres,
including associated signage,
are designed to be compatible
with adjoining land uses and
landscape.
Western Australian Planning Commission - DC Policy 1.10 - August 2016 5

3 Policy measures for Freeway service centres
freeway service centres 3.1.8 Freeway service centres should be
and roadhouses located at interchanges (either one
side or both), where they can be
directly accessed by both freeway
3.1 Locational measures users and local motorists. On
proposed freeways where there are
3.1.1 Sites must be large enough that long stretches of road with no existing
their operation will not detract from urban areas nearby, freeway service
the amenity of existing or proposed centres may be located between
sensitive uses, including residential freeway interchanges.
areas.
3.1.9 Freeway service centres should
3.1.2 Freeway service centres and generally be located a minimum
roadhouses should not detract from of 40 kilometres from similar
existing or planned settlements and existing facilities or approved sites
employment areas that are identified on a freeway, subject to network
in local planning strategies and configuration and traffic volume
schemes. being satisfied.
3.1.3 Locations must be consistent with 3.1.10 Where a freeway service centre is
Main Roads WA’s program for further to be duplicated on both sides of
freeway extensions (see Appendix 1: a freeway, both sites must satisfy all
Proposed 2031 Freeway Network – relevant policy measures.
Perth and Peel Region), and highway
3.1.11 Freeway service centres should be
realignments or reconfiguration.
integrated with existing or proposed
3.1.4 Sites should not be located in rapid transit systems, cycle or
environmentally or visually sensitive pedestrian paths, and major service
areas unless potential adverse impacts infrastructure located within the
can be adequately mitigated. freeway reserve.
3.1.5 Sites should be identified in local
Roadhouses
planning strategies where possible.
3.1.12 Roadhouses should be located within
3.1.6 Vehicle access to freeway service
or adjacent to gazetted townsites
centres and roadhouses must not
wherever possible, to support the local
be detrimental to the operation of
economy.
the freeway or other roads, or pose
an increased risk to the safety of
3.1.13 Roadhouses within towns should be
road users. This will be determined
located on the periphery of town.
by the Western Australian Planning
Commission on the advice of Main 3.1.14 Where a town that is bypassed by
Roads WA. a State road is unable to support a
service station, a roadhouse may be
3.1.7 Freeway service centres and
located at the intersection with the
roadhouses should not generally be
town access road, so it can serve both
located in areas with extreme bushfire
local motorists and those using the
hazard level. Bushfire risks should
bypass route.
be capable of being managed in
accordance with Western Australian 3.1.15 Roadhouses should be located where
Planning Commission policies and they complement any existing facilities
guidelines. provided by State and local agencies.
6 Western Australian Planning Commission - DC Policy 1.10 - August 2016

3.1.16 Roadhouses should be located where 3.2.7 Freeway service centres located on
they have a sustainable supply of or adjacent to a freeway interchange
potable water. must not negatively impact on the
safe and efficient functioning of the
3.1.17 In remote regions, roadhouses should
interchange.
be located strategically where they
can support emergency services for
travellers and local residents, such as 3.3 Design measures,
in the vicinity of major river crossings
including signage
and at major road intersections, and
where they may provide economic 3.3.1 Freeway service centres and
opportunities for local communities. roadhouses should either be visible
from the adjoining roadway or clearly
signposted, but they should not be
3.2 Siting measures
designed to be so prominent that they
may be a hazardous distraction for
3.2.1 Sites should generally be a minimum
drivers.
of two to five hectares in size, although
they may be larger, for example if 3.3.2 The design and layout of built facilities
they need to accommodate freight and landscape treatment should be
vehicles, tourist coaches and cars of a high standard, although materials
towing caravans etc. used may be inexpensive or recycled.
The appearance of structures and
3.2.2 Sites should be of an appropriate size
the choice of plant species should
and configuration to provide safe and
blend with the local landscape setting,
efficient traffic circulation, easy access
provide adequate sightlines and
to all facilities, and safe pedestrian
reflect local character. Aspects to
movement.
consider include architectural style,
3.2.3 Where possible, the development the choice and colour of exterior
should not be visually prominent, such building materials, plant species
as at the focal point of an important including their dimension at maturity,
view or at a higher elevation than and materials used for pavement and
surroundings. edging.
3.2.4 Sites should be capable of minimising 3.3.3 Measures must be taken to address
any negative noise, odour, visual and noise, odour, visual and light spill
light spill impacts on nearby sensitive impacts, where required. Measures
land uses including residential and may include screening of appropriate
tourist accommodation. width, height and materials.
3.2.5 Service centres that do not have 3.3.4 To assist with integrating freeway
access to network sewerage should service centres and roadhouses into
be sited where effluent can be their landscape setting, landscaped
contained onsite, to protect the quality areas should be provided at their
of surface and ground water. fronts and sides. The size of the
landscaped areas is to be based on
site level visual landscape assessment
Freeway service centres
that includes consideration of
3.2.6 Freeway service centres located screening and safety requirements.
between freeway interchanges must
3.3.5 As a pedestrian safety measure,
be a safe distance from the closest
parking and refuelling facilities for
freeway exit and entry points and
cars, coaches and freight vehicles
only be accessible directly from the
should be segregated.
freeway, compliant with Main Roads
WA’s standards.
Western Australian Planning Commission - DC Policy 1.10 - August 2016 7

3.3.6 Service centres should provide shower Freeway service centres
facilities and dedicated truck driver
3.3.11 Freeway service centres should
respite areas.
generally be open 24 hours a day.
Signage 3.3.12 Restaurant facilities may
accommodate a combined total of
3.3.7 To avoid visual clutter, there should
up to 150 seated customers and take-
be a single, multi-tenancy pylon sign
away food retailing may be provided
that identifies the primary facility and
contiguously with the service centre.
may include individual tenancies. To
No drive-through facility will be
ensure that the scale of the sign is
permitted for take-away foods.
compatible with the character of the
landscape, the overall height of the 3.3.13 Convenience shopping may occupy
multi-tenancy pylon sign should be an aggregate retail floor space of up
no greater than 12.0m. However, a to 300 square metres.
height up to a maximum of 20.0m
3.3.14 Facilities for cyclists should be
may be considered where it can
provided where there is an existing or
be demonstrated that particular
proposed cycle path in the freeway
circumstances prevailing at the site,
reserve.
such as visual obstructions caused
by vegetation or nearby buildings,
warrant an increase. Roadhouses
3.3.8 To reduce visual intrusion into drivers’ 3.3.15 Roadhouses should provide sheltered
field of view, the multi-tenancy pylon picnic areas and capitalise on
sign should be located a minimum of adjoining natural features or town
10.0m from the boundary of the road attractions, to encourage motorists to
reserve and/or positioned outside the have a rest stop.
clear zone in accordance with Main
3.3.16 Convenience shops may occupy an
Roads guidelines, whichever is the
aggregate retail floor space of up
greater.
to 150 square metres, or greater in
3.3.9 Signage located on individual special circumstances.
tenancies should not obscure
3.3.17 Restaurant facilities may accommodate
architectural features of buildings
up to 50 seated customers with limited
and should not be located on or
take-away food retailing contained
above rooflines, to reduce the visual
within a single building. No drive-
dominance of signage.
through facility will be permitted for
3.3.10 Signage should have due regard for take-away foods.
the policy and specifications of Main
Roads WA and should be generally
consistent with the relevant local
planning scheme and local planning
policies.
8 Western Australian Planning Commission - DC Policy 1.10 - August 2016

plan must demonstrate how the
4 Implementing this policy
proposed development integrates
with development in, and planning
The relevant planning instruments for
for, the locality.
implementing this policy are region schemes,
local planning strategies and schemes 4.6 The subdivision of rural land for
and structure plans in accordance with the developing a freeway service centre
Planning and Development (Local Planning or roadhouse may be considered
Schemes) Regulations 2015, as well as under clause 6(e) of Development
individual subdivisions and development. Control Policy 3.4 Subdivision of rural
land.
4.1 Where a region scheme applies,
service centres should generally 4.7 In considering zoning, structure
be located on land that is zoned plan, subdivision and development
Rural, but may also be located on proposals related to service centres,
land zoned Urban, Urban Deferred, the Western Australian Planning
Industrial or Industrial Deferred. Commission may require technical
reports which demonstrate that
4.2 A service centre may be located within
the applicable policy measures are
a Primary Regional Road reserve
capable of being satisfied, including:
under a regional or local planning
scheme, where the uses are restricted • traffic and road safety impacts, and
to those that are compatible with the proposed management measures;
purpose of that reserve.
• retail sustainability assessment;
4.3 Where a local planning scheme • noise, odour, visual or light spill
applies, service centre sites should be impacts on road users and any
zoned ‘Special Use - Service Centre’ or existing or proposed residential
‘Special Use – Roadhouse’, depending areas or other sensitive land uses,
on the location. The uses provided for and proposed mitigation and
in planning scheme provisions should management measures such as
generally be restricted to those which provision of buffers;
are provided for in the respective
• a signage strategy that addresses
definition. Relevant provisions should
the amenity and visual impacts of
be inserted into the local planning
signage, including the cumulative
scheme, including those based on the
impact of all signs in the locality;
provisions outlined in this policy.
and
4.4 The local planning scheme should
• environmental impacts (ground
provide for buffers where necessary
and surface water, flora and fauna,
to mitigate residual noise, odour and
air emissions, solid waste etc),
light spill from service centres; for
and mitigation and management
example, where service centres are to
measures.
be located in or adjacent to sensitive
land uses such as residential areas,
will operate 24 hours and will provide
services for freight vehicles.
4.5 A structure plan to co-ordinate the
subdivision and/or development
of land for a freeway service centre
or a roadhouse may be required
for orderly and proper planning
in accordance with the Planning
and Development (Local Planning
Scheme) Regulations 2015. A structure
Western Australian Planning Commission - DC Policy 1.10 - August 2016 9

5 Definitions Freeway service centre
Freeway service centre means premises that
Land use terms used shall have the meanings has direct access to a freeway and which
provided in the Planning and Development provides all the following services or facilities
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015, and may provide other associated facilities
unless otherwise identified. or services but does not provide bulk fuel
services -
Freeway
• (a) service station facilities;
For the purposes of this policy, a freeway is • (b) emergency breakdown repair for
a road reserved as a Primary Regional Road vehicles;
in a regional planning scheme, planned to
• (c) charging points for electric vehicles;
a freeway standard with grade-separated
interchanges and restricted direct access from • (d) facilities for cyclists;
adjacent property.
• (e) restaurant, cafe or fast food services,
(excluding the sale or consumption of
State road alcohol under the Liquor Licensing Act
(also known as primary distributor road) 1988);
A State road provides for major regional and • (f) take-away food retailing, without a drive-
inter-regional traffic movement and carries through facility;
large volumes of generally fast moving traffic.
• (g) public ablution facilities, including
Some are strategic freight routes and all
provision for truck drivers, disabled access
State roads are managed by Main Roads WA.
and infant changing rooms;
Primary distributor roads include freeways,
• (h) parking for passenger and freight
highways, national highways and main roads
vehicles;
and are collectively known as State roads.
(Source: Main Roads WA, Western Australia • (i) outdoor rest stop facilities such as picnic
Road Hierarchy) tables and shade areas;
• (j) dump points to dispose of black and
Service station
grey water from recreational vehicles.
Service station means premises other than
premises used for a transport depot, panel Roadhouse
beating, spray painting, major repairs or
Roadhouse means premises that has direct
wrecking, that are used for -
access to a State road other than a freeway
• (a) the retail sale of petroleum products, and which provides the services or facilities
motor vehicle accessories and goods of an provided by a freeway service centre and
incidental or convenience nature; or may provide any of the following additional
facilities or services -
• (b) the carrying out of greasing, tyre repairs
and minor mechanical repairs to motor • (a) a full range of automotive repair
vehicles. services;
• (b) wrecking, panel beating and spray
Note: This policy does not apply to service
painting services;
stations other than freeway service centres and
roadhouses on State roads. • (c) transport depot facilities;
• (d) short-term accommodation for guests
(including motel and caravan sites,
generally in remote locations);
• (e) facilities for being a muster point in
response to accidents, natural disasters
and other emergencies.
10 Western Australian Planning Commission - DC Policy 1.10 - August 2016

Appendix 1: Proposed 2031 Freeway Network
– Perth and Peel Region
EXISTING AND FUTURE FREEWAY NETWORK
Perth and Peel Regions
LEGEND
Existing Freeway
Yanchep
Future Freeway
Other State Road
Local Road
Joondalup
Midland
Perth
Fremantle
Armadale
Rockingham
Job No: J35119 (c2441)
TRIM Doc: 1521-0069/00
Data Source: IRIS
Data Currency: Oct 2015
Date of Print: 28 - Oct -15
Western Australian Planning Commission - DC Policy 1.10 - August 2016 11

Appendix 2: WAPC policies and guidelines to be read
in conjunction with Development Control
Policy 1.10
• State Planning Strategy and State Planning Policy 1: State Planning
Framework (Variation No. 2)
• State Planning Policy 2: Environment and Natural Resources
• State Planning Policy 2.2: Gnangara Groundwater Protection
• State Planning Policy 2.5: Land Use Planning in Rural Areas
• State Planning Policy 3.2: Aboriginal Settlements
• State Planning Policy 5.4: Road and Rail Transport Noise and Freight
Considerations in Land Use Planning
• Development Control Policy 1.4: Functional Road Classification for
Planning
• Development Control Policy 1.7 General Road Planning
• Development Control Policy 5.1 Regional Roads (Vehicular Access)
• Development Control Policy 5.4 Advertising on Reserved Land
• Tourism Planning Guidelines (WAPC, 2014)
• Planning Bulletin 83/2013 Planning for Tourism (WAPC, 2013)
• Rural Planning Guidelines (WAPC, 2014)
• Visual Landscape Planning in Western Australia (WAPC, 2007)
• Indian Ocean Drive Planning Guideline (WAPC, 2014)
12 Western Australian Planning Commission - DC Policy 1.10 - August 2016