Provision of Public Art in Development Proposals
This document outlines the requirement for public art provision for certain developments, what is
public art and installation requirements.
The City acknowledges the many benefits of including public art within the public realm on both
public and private land. Public art contributes to the identity of a place in various ways: by interpreting
and highlighting local culture and customs, contributing positively to the overall design and visual
appearance of a place, and adding to the vibrancy, familiarity, and legibility of a place through the
creation of memorable experiences and landmarks. Public art also creates work opportunities for
artists, businesses, and manufacturers.
Policy Type: Council Policy Policy No. LPP 1.4
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 20 May 2025
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development (Local
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (Regulations) and the City of Melville Local Planning Scheme
No. 6 (LPS No.6). This Local Planning Policy may be cited as Local Planning Policy No. 1.4 –
Provision of Public Art in Development Proposals (LPP 1.4).
Policy Objectives
The objectives of this policy are as follows:
 To contribute to a sense of place through the provision of public art which provides an
interpretation and expression of the local area’s natural, physical, cultural, and social values.
 To increase the amenity of a place for existing or future occupants where there is a new
substantive development through the provision of public artwork on the development site or
within nearby public realm.
 To add to the appearance, vibrancy, character and amenity of developments and their
surrounding environment.
 To create local landmarks to aid in the legibility of places.
 To create new professional and economic opportunities for established and emerging
Western Australian artists.
 To provide consistency in the provision of public art in new developments through clear
definitions, application and process and implement the City’s Public Art Strategy and Cultural
Plan.
 To establish best practice in the provision and delivery of public art in the development
process.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 3:32 PM Page 1 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Policy Scope
This policy applies to all applications for development approval for multiple dwellings, mixed use or
non-residential developments (or additions or extensions to these developments) where the
development cost nominated on the Application for Development Approval form exceeds $2 million.
The policy provides assessment criteria to guide the assessment of development applications that
include public art.
Definitions
Public Art
Public art is the artistic expression of an artist integrated into the public realm such as a street, park,
urban plaza or public building (it does not include internal spaces of buildings which are accessible
to the public).
Public artwork can be integrated into the building or be freestanding on the development site. This
can occur as a stand-alone art work, or integration into the fabric of buildings, road infrastructure
elements or landscaped outdoor spaces. Public art can be permanent, temporary, or ephemeral,
however temporary and ephemeral art can only be provided in public spaces.
Public art can include (but is not limited to):
(a) The artistic treatment of functional equipment/building element such as screening, balustrades,
bike racks, benches, fountains, playground equipment, light posts or shade structures which
are unique and produced by a professional artist.
(b) Landscape art enhancements such as walkways, bridges or art features which are unique and
produced by a professional artist.
(c) Murals and mosaics covering walls, floors and walkways.
(d) Sculptures, free-standing, wall supported or incorporated as an integral element of a buildings’
design.
Public art does not include:
(a) Business logos. Artworks that include a business logo
(b) Advertising signage. Commercial promotions in any form
(c) Directional elements such as super graphics, signage or colour coding
(d) Art objects which are mass produced or off-the-shelf reproductions.
(e) Landscaping or hardscaping which would normally be associated with the development.
(f) Services or utilities necessary to operate or maintain art works.
Artist
A professional visual artist can be defined as a person who fits the following
criteria:
 a person who has specialised training in the artistic field (not necessarily in academic
institutions)
 is recognised as a professional by his or her peers (artists working in the same artistic
tradition)
 dedicates time to make and developing a body of work.
 has a history of showing their work in exhibitions, performances or publications.
In some cases this definition may be relaxed where it may be specified for a particular project.
For example, a project involving emerging artists, Indigenous artists, students or street/urban artists.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 3:32 PM Page 2 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Artists may work individually or in collaborative teams to develop and implement public art projects.
Collaborative teams may include, but are not limited to, writers, choreographers, stage designers,
and performers as well as visual and new media artists and craftspeople.
No artist under consideration for a public art in developments project may have a familial relationship
to the Developer or have financial interest in the development.
Public Art Co-ordinator/Art Consultant:
A person who has relevant qualification and experience in public art procurement and project delivery
who is contracted to manage the procurement of the public art project on behalf of the
developer/landowner.
Construction Cost:
Has the same meaning as the cost of development provided as part of the development application.
Or
All costs associated with the preparation, construction and full completion of a development,
including all materials, labour, servicing and ancillary costs. To ensure accurate calculation of public
art contribution values, the will City require calculation based on the building permit construction cost
(which is required to be prepared based on quantity surveyor input or use of a reputable cost guide
estimate).
Ephemeral art
Art that is transitory in nature, usually designed as an experience or event and lasting for only a short
period, such as land art, light projections, performance art, music, dance, or exhibitions. It is
generally created with impermanent materials.
City of Melville Capital Arts Trust
A special fund held in the City’s accounts for the purposes of accumulating cash-in-lieu contributions
made under this policy. The funds are to be used by the City, or persons engaged by the City, for
the provision of public art within or within proximity of the contributing site. A public art strategy and/or
Cultural Plan will guide the use of the funds accumulated.
Public Art Plan
A plan prepared and submitted for the City’s approval to ensure public art is included in the
development and provided to the City’s requirements. (See Information Requirements of this policy
for further details)
Temporary Art
In the context of this policy, temporary art is artwork that has a predetermined lifespan, is designed
to be installed for a short time frame (e.g. 1 week to 1 year) and includes site specific installations
and sculpture.
POLICY STATEMENT
Application
1 Each application for the construction of a multiple dwelling, mixed use or non-residential
development (or alterations, additions or extensions to these developments) are to provide
public art in accordance with the below table:
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 3:32 PM Page 3 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Table 1
Construction Cost Required Contribution
Up to $2 million Contributions are optional and negotiable.
$2 million to $15 million Minimum 1% contribution either provided as
public art on the development site or paid into
the public art fund to be expended within
proximity of the development site.
$15 million to $50 million $150,000 plus 1% for every construction cost
dollar over $15 million, either provided as
public art on the development site or paid into
the public art fund to be expended within
proximity of the development site.
Over $50 million $500,000, either provided as public art on the
development site or paid into the public art
fund to be expended within proximity of the
development site; and
An additional contribution of 0.5% for every
construction cost dollar over $50 million paid
into the public art fund to be expended within
proximity of the development site.
2 Details of the proposed public art will be required to be provided in a Public Art Plan for approval
by a City panel prior to the approval of any development application, or at a later date as
specified by a condition of development approval. Alternatively, where the developer elects,
and the City agrees, the public art contribution may be satisfied by cash-in-lieu based on the
% rate described Table 1 above. Cash-in-lieu payments will be received into and held by the
City of Melville Capital Arts Trust.
3 Public art provision on site is required to be provided prior to initial occupation of the
development. If cash in lieu contribution is proposed instead, this is to be paid prior to
construction commencing. The development approval will be conditioned.
4 Where the developer elects to provide public art on site, a public art plan is to be provided as
part of the application for development approval or in lieu of this – minimum detail provided to
advise of the indicative public art opportunity locations and themes of public art provided. In
the absence of this information, the City will be of the understanding the applicant is electing
to proceed with cash in lieu and the development approval will be conditioned accordingly.
5 For developments with a value of less than $15 million, if the developer elects to provide a
cash in lieu payment over provision on site, the contribution will attract a discount of 15%.
6 Temporary and ephemeral public art can only be provided in public spaces and therefore needs
to be procured and managed by the City. This means that provision can only be funded through
cash in lieu and must still meet the definition of ‘public art’ and be delivered by an ‘artist’ as
outlined within this policy.
Installation
7 Public art is to be located within the lot boundaries of the development site unless otherwise
agreed by the City.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 3:32 PM Page 4 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

8 No additional development approval will be required for the installation of the public art located
within the lot boundaries, unless it will result in any variations to the applicable development
requirements for the Precinct.
9 Prior to the installation of the approved public art the installer shall ensure compliance with all
relevant standards and legislation. Some public art may require a building permit.
10 Only artists or persons supervised by a professional artist will be eligible to carry out public art
commissions.
11 Once approved, the public art should be installed prior to the initial occupation of the
development (or a later time as agreed by the City in writing) and thereafter maintained in
perpetuity by the property owner/s. This will be conditioned on the development approval
accordingly and does not form part of the public provision budget.
12 Where cash-in-lieu is provided, such funds will be expended by the City in accordance with the
Cultural Plan on public art located within the applicable neighbourhood. All funds to be spent
within 5 years of their receipt.
13 A plaque or similar identifier is to be installed on, or in close proximity to the public art which
details the artist’s name, name of the installation and date of the installation.
Information Requirements
14 The following details of the proposed public art are to be provided to the City in a Public Art
Plan for approval prior to its installation:
(a) Design documentation including:
i. contract,
ii. artist details and qualifications,
iii. design brief (artist brief) research,
iv. concept development, and
v. a detailed statement addressing compliance with the Performance Standards
outlined below section.
(b) Detailed plans of the artwork which are to scale and include dimensions, details of the
materials, location, colours, lighting plan (if applicable) and installation methods.
(c) Cost calculations of the proposed public art which are itemised per art work. These can
take into account the artist’s fees, consultants fees, labour, materials, installation,
operating costs and costs of any required permits or approvals. Where the public art is
to replace a functional and/or required part of the development, such as a balcony
balustrade, the cost calculation shall reflect the difference in cost between the provision
of the standard component and the cost of the artist prepared component. The public
art consultant and/or public art project management fees shall make up no more than
15 percent of total budget. The total artist fee should be in proportion to the art budget.
(d) For artwork proposed to be located over public land, a copy of the relevant engineering
certification and public liability insurance is to be submitted prior to approval being
issued. Please note that relevant landowner authority may prevent provision within
certain locations.
(e) A maintenance report prepared by the artist, including consent from the artist for any
ongoing care or maintenance of the artwork by the building owner or public authority.
(f) A letter written by the commissioner of the artwork acknowledging the implications of
the Copyright Amendment (Moral Rights) Act 2000 including how the artist will be
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 3:32 PM Page 5 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

acknowledged (naming plaque), accepting maintenance obligations, and consent for
the City to publish images of the artwork.
15 Once installation is complete the following information is required to be provided to the
City;
(a) contact details for the suppliers/manufacturers/ installers;
(b) certified drawings where applicable; and
(c) photographs to a professional standard in both high and low resolution. Details of the
photographer should also be provided to allow them to be credited in the instance the
City use the photos for promotional purposes.
Performance Standards
16 Public art should satisfy all of the following criteria:
(a) Be located where it can be clearly seen from the public realm.
(b) Be an original artwork, specifically designed for the building on site on which it is to be
located.
(c) Be of high aesthetic quality.
(d) Be durable, sustainable and easy to maintain.
(e) Be created with consideration for the City’s Public Art Strategy and Masterplan.
(f) Contribute to an attractive and stimulating environment.
(g) Not detract from the amenity or safety of the surrounding area.
(h) Where considered appropriate be lit at night by the use of energy efficient lighting but
such that there is no adverse amenity impact on the surrounding locality through
unacceptable light spill.
(i) Be responsive to the site context and reflect the local area’s natural, physical, cultural or
social values history.
(j) Take into account the existing public art in vicinity so to avoid repetition and to ensure
the artwork is unique.
(k) That the public art be functional where appropriate.
(l) Be resistant as possible to vandalism.
Exemption from requiring Development Approval
17 If Public Art is proposed outside of a new development or substantive addition, it may not
require development approval under the exemptions within Clause 61 of the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015.
18 All artworks which are delivered to satisfy a condition of development approval on private
property are covered under the substantive development approval. Modification to the artworks
once installed however may attract a new development application.
19 Public artworks delivered by the City are public works and generally exempt from requiring
development approval.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 6/06/2025 3:32 PM Page 6 of 7
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Local Planning Scheme No. 6
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Public Art Strategy and Masterplan
Melville City Centre Public Art Strategy
City of Melville Cultural Plan
Relevant area specific Structure Plans
Delegated Authority No: DA-020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Ordinary Meeting of Council 16/04/13 P13/3378
Reviews
Ordinary Meeting of Council 19/08/14 P14/3527
Ordinary Meeting of Council 05/2016 P16/3726
Ordinary Meeting of Council 19/03/2019 CD19/8112
(Final adoption by CEO 11/06/2019 following public advertising)
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/05/2025 UP25/67
Changes to this document can only be made by the Responsible Officer via a System Improvement Request
Printed version is uncontrolled and valid only at the time of printing
©Copyright 2009 City of Melville Page 7 of 7