State Planning Policy 2.9
Water
December 2025
Prepared under Part 3 of the Planning and Development Act 2005 by the
Western Australian Planning Commission

click to follow
1 CITATION 1 7.6 Specific area measures:
Peel-Harvey coastal plain
catchment 7
2 POLICY INTENT 1
7.7 Specific area measures:
Swan Canning
3 WATER IN WESTERN river system 7
Disclaimer AUSTRALIA 1
This document has been produced by the
Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage DEFINITIONS 8
on behalf of the Western Australian Planning 4 APPLICATION OF THIS
Commission. Any representation, statement, POLICY 2
opinion or advice expressed or implied in this
publication is made in good faith and on the
basis that the Government, its employees and 5 POLICY OBJECTIVES 2
agents are not liable for any damage or loss
whatsoever which may occur as a result of
action taken or not taken, as the case may be, 6 POLICY OUTCOMES 2
in respect of any representation, statement,
opinion or advice referred to herein.
Professional advice should be obtained before 7 POLICY MEASURES 3
applying the information contained in this
7.1 General measures 3
document to particular circumstances.
7.2 Environmental, social
and cultural values 3
© Western Australian Planning Commission
7.3 Riverine flooding 4
Published by the
7.4 Infrastructure and supply 5
Western Australian Planning Commission
Gordon Stephenson House 7.5 Specific area measures:
140 William Street Public drinking water
Perth WA 6000 source areas 6
Locked Bag 2506
Perth WA 6001
Publication date: 16 December 2025
Operational date: 18 December 2025
website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
tel: 08 6551 8002
fax: 08 6551 9001
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
This document is available in alternative
formats on application to Communication
Services.

State Planning Policy 2.9
1
Water
December 2025
1 CITATION 2 POLICY INTENT Planning plays an important role in responding to the
pressures on water resources. This includes ensuring
This is a State Planning Policy prepared under Part 3 of To ensure that planning and development considers all future development is located adequately, serviced with
the Planning and Development Act 2005. It may be cited as water matters and delivers the outcomes in section 6 of appropriate wastewater, stormwater and groundwater
State Planning Policy 2.9 Water. the policy. management infrastructure and contributes towards the
management of water quality and quantity, ecological
This policy, in accordance with Part 3 of the Planning and
health and the social and cultural values of water
Development (State Planning Policies) Regulations 2024,
3 WATER IN WESTERN resources.
repeals the following State Planning Policies:
AUSTRALIA
Future development will need to be supported by
1. State Planning Policy 2.1 Peel-Harvey Coastal Plain
drinking and non-drinking water supplies from a range
Catchment
Water is a basic requirement of life. The health and
of sources, including surface water, groundwater,
2. State Planning Policy 2.2 Gnangara Groundwater wellbeing of the community, environment and economy desalinated seawater, treated wastewater, stormwater and
Protection are dependent on water that is of sufficient quantity and rainwater, and should be suited to the required purpose
quality. Groundwater, surface water, desalinated and
(that is ‘fit-for-purpose’).
3. State Planning Policy 2.3 Jandakot Groundwater
recycled water support a wide range of ecological values
Protection and human use values such as drinking water, irrigation For the foreseeable future, surface water and groundwater
4. State Planning Policy 2.7 Public Drinking Water Source of public open spaces, amenity, recreation, tourism, will continue to be the most cost-effective source of
Policy agriculture, fishing, aquaculture, mining, industry, and high-quality public drinking water. The protection of
cultural heritage. public drinking water source areas is essential to safeguard
5. State Planning Policy 2.9 Water Resources
public health and retain these strategically important
Western Australia’s water resources are vulnerable and
6. State Planning Policy 2.10 Swan-Canning River System supply resources. The State Government has adopted
subject to increasing pressure from factors that can affect
an integrated land use and water resource management
7. Draft State Planning Policy 2.9 Planning for Water the quality and quantity of water, as well as the values that
approach to protect public drinking water supplies, with
depend on it. Climate change in Western Australia has
an emphasis on the prevention of risks to water quality.
This policy replaces the following policies and guidelines:
already resulted in changes to rainfall patterns, increased
1. Better Urban Water Management temperatures and sea level rise, which in turn have Development and water resource management are
impacted the reliability and quality of our water resources. interrelated and need to be assessed and delivered
2. Government Sewerage Policy
For example, decreased rainfall in the South West Land in an integrated manner. Integrated water resource
3. Government Sewerage Policy Explanatory Guidelines. Division is resulting in lower recharge to groundwater and management is essential for the sustainable growth of
surface water flows into waterways and reservoirs. our state. It provides an opportunity to respond to the
Where there are inconsistencies between this policy and
pressures on water resources and enhance the values that
the flood measures in Section 5.2 of the State Planning Land use change and development required to support
depend on them. This includes improving the amenity,
Policy 3.4 Natural Hazards and Disasters, this policy a growing population can impact water resources
liveability and economic viability of our cities, towns and
prevails. through changes to hydrological regimes, ecological
rural areas.
health, contamination, water demand, salinisation and
eutrophication.

State Planning Policy 2.9
2
Water
December 2025
Integrated water resource management requires a whole- • Swan Canning river system 6 POLICY OUTCOMES
of-government approach. It involves a range of water,
• Sensitive water resource areas
environmental, planning, health and economic legislation, The outcomes listed below specify the role of planning
policies and processes. and development in contributing to the overall objectives
The policy mapping is available online and can be viewed
of this policy. Due to the interrelated nature of water
at www.dplh.wa.gov.au.
resources, each outcome may contribute to multiple
4 APPLICATION OF THIS objectives. The outcomes should be achieved through
POLICY compliance with the policy measures. The outcomes may
5 POLICY OBJECTIVES
also provide a basis for policy evaluation.
This policy and its guidelines outline how water resource
The objectives of this policy are to:
Environmental, social and cultural values
management should be integrated into planning
5.1 Protect and improve the environmental and the
processes. For detailed guidance on the implementation
6.1 Planning and development maintains or enhances
social, cultural and economic values of the state’s
and application of this policy, the policy is to be
water quality and hydrological regimes to protect
water resources.
considered in conjunction with the policy mapping and
public health and support healthy ecosystems
the Water Guidelines (Guidelines). 5.2 Protect public health and the long-term supply of through the:
good quality and affordable drinking water.
This policy and its Guidelines apply to the preparation
i. protection of sensitive water resources and
and assessment of proposals in relation to water matters, 5.3 Manage the risk of flooding to people, property and other important environments;
including regional and sub-regional frameworks, region infrastructure.
ii. protection of existing vegetation and/or
and local planning schemes and scheme amendments,
5.4 Ensure the secure and sustainable supply, use, restoration of cleared or degraded vegetation,
local planning policies, planning strategies, precinct
disposal and re-use of water resources. preferably with endemic species;
plans, activity centre plans, structure plans, subdivision
applications and development applications across 5.5 Ensure future development is resilient to the water- iii. appropriate siting and management of land
Western Australia. related impacts of climate change. uses; and
This policy applies only to proposals prepared and 5.6 Minimise future costs and protect public health by iv. maintenance of natural flows in waterways,
assessed under the Planning and Development Act 2005. ensuring that appropriate wastewater infrastructure groundwater levels and inundation of wetlands
This policy is not intended to apply to a proposal for a is provided. to sustain aquatic and terrestrial habitats
single house on a single lot unless a significant water through the delivery of appropriate stormwater
resource matter has been identified for the lot within a and groundwater management systems.
local planning scheme (e.g. sections 7.3, 7.5 and 7.7 of this
6.2 Waterways and wetlands have adequate foreshore
policy).
areas and wetland buffers to protect, manage and
The policy mapping includes: conserve water quality, native vegetation, aquatic
and riparian habitats, ecological linkages and
• Public drinking water source areas
associated biodiversity values.
• Peel Harvey coastal plain catchment

State Planning Policy 2.9
3
Water
December 2025
6.3 Aboriginal heritage values in relation to water 6.10 Development connects to or provides for reticulated 7 POLICY MEASURES
resources are identified and protected consistent sewerage to protect public health, amenity and the
with the Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972. environment, and to minimise financial burden to 7.1 General measures
future communities.
6.4 Historic heritage values in relation to water resources
a) All relevant water-related matters should be
are protected consistent with the Heritage Act 2018. 6.11 Onsite wastewater disposal is provided only in
considered at the earliest possible stage of the
limited circumstances, where reticulated sewerage
6.5 Planning and development maintains and enhances planning process and all subsequent stages in
is not a viable option and where the associated risks
public access to water resources where appropriate. accordance with the Guidelines.
are appropriately managed without compromising
6.6 Planning and development enhances amenity and public health and the environment. b) Proposals are to be accompanied by sufficient
sense of place associated with water resources, information in accordance with the Guidelines, which
6.12 The construction of dams, crossings and rural drains
which in turn protect public health and increase specify instances where a Water Management Report
does not adversely affect the environment, visual
resilience of the community. is required and what it must contain.
amenity, public health or other users (upstream or
downstream) of the water resource. c) Proposals and supporting information should be
Riverine flooding
referred to relevant agencies and licensed water
6.13 Safe, resilient and effective stormwater and
6.7 Planning and development in and around flood- service providers in accordance with the Guidelines.
groundwater management systems adopt water
prone land:
sensitive design approaches to protect and enhance d) Proposals should consider water resource-related
i. does not introduce unacceptable risk to people, amenity, public health and environmental values. issues associated with climate change.
property or infrastructure;
e) Planning decisions (except development applications)
Public drinking water source protection
ii. does not impede the movement of or increase should consider cumulative impacts on water
floodwater (upstream or downstream) in flood 6.14 Planning and development in public drinking water resources. Where the cumulative impact is considered
events; and source areas maximises the long-term protection significantly detrimental, the proposal should not be
and management of water quality and quantity for supported.
iii. reduces, where possible, the impact of flooding
public drinking water supply.
on people, property and infrastructure.
7.2 Environmental, social and
cultural values
Water use and infrastructure
6.8 Water demand is minimised through water sensitive Wetlands and waterways
design, and the efficient use and reuse of water.
Proposals should, in accordance with the Guidelines:
6.9 Development has access and contributes to secure,
a) identify wetlands and their buffers and waterways and
fit-for-purpose, sustainable and climate-resilient
their foreshore areas and/or reserves;
water supplies. Where practical, this involves
recycled water and/or other fit-for-purpose water b) facilitate the transfer of wetlands and their buffers
sources. and waterways and their foreshore areas to public
ownership, where appropriate;

State Planning Policy 2.9
4
Water
December 2025
c) retain and/or restore vegetation important for the – agriculture - intensive (particularly annual Cultural
long-term health of water resources within wetlands horticulture)
Proposals should, in accordance with the Guidelines:
and their buffers, waterways and their foreshore
– animal husbandry – intensive
areas, preferably using endemic species to restore p) identify Aboriginal heritage and use best endeavours
vegetation; – animal establishments or rural pursuits involving to protect, avoid or minimise harm consistent with
stocking rates that exceed recommended the Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972; and
d) where possible, maintain and restore ecological
stocking rates
linkages; q) identify, conserve and protect historic heritage places
Flexibility to this measure may be applied, in and values.
e) identify appropriate measures to protect public health
accordance with the Guidelines, where the proposal is
from mosquito-borne diseases;
located within priority agricultural land. In areas where 7.3 Riverine flooding
f) identify and protect sensitive water resources; nutrient export cannot be effectively managed, closed
agricultural systems are encouraged; and The following measures apply to flood-prone areas
g) where possible, protect and enhance vegetation
dominated by riverine processes. Pluvial flooding,
within sensitive water resource areas, in particular l) demonstrate that infrastructure and site management
which occurs when an extreme rainfall event creates a
endemic species; and practices are in place to manage nutrient and all
flood independent of an overflowing water body,
other contaminants, including sediment, particularly
h) ensure land uses with the potential to significantly
is addressed in the Stormwater and groundwater sub-
within sensitive water resource areas and public
alter the hydrological regime are managed to protect
section of section 7.4 Infrastructure and supply. Coastal
drinking water source areas, and adjacent to other
water resources and associated ecological values and
storm surge and other inundation associated with water
important environments.
other important environments.
bodies dominated by tidal processes is to be addressed
Local planning schemes and local planning policies
in accordance with State Planning Policy 2.6 State Coastal
Water quality should, in accordance with the Guidelines:
Planning. Where there are inconsistencies between this
Proposals should, in accordance with the Guidelines: m) include site-specific measures to prevent and/or policy and the flood measures in Section 5.2 of State
manage the potential impacts on water quality and Planning Policy 3.4 Natural Hazards and Disasters, this policy
i) minimise export of nutrient and all other
protect water resources. prevails.
contaminants, including sediment, entering water
resources; Proposals should, in accordance with the Guidelines:
Social
j) avoid adverse effects on the natural and built a) identify flood-prone areas;
Proposals should, in accordance with the Guidelines:
environment and/or human health when undertaking b) not rezone, subdivide or propose additional
subdivision and development of land containing acid n) maintain or enhance safe public access to water development that intensifies land use within a
sulfate soils or contaminated sites; resources, except where at the detriment of defined floodway;
ecosystem health and/or public drinking water source
k) be located on land where nutrient export to sensitive protection; and c) maintain the free passage and temporary storage of
water resources can be effectively managed, when floodwaters;
they involve: o) maximise opportunities for water in the landscape
to enhance amenity, sense of place, liveability and
contribute to urban greening and mitigation of urban
heat.

State Planning Policy 2.9
5
Water
December 2025
d) incorporate a minimum habitable finished floor level Dams, crossings and rural drains groundwater discharges, while also protecting and
of 0.5 metre above the expected one per cent annual enhancing environmental functionality, local amenity
Proposals should, in accordance with the Guidelines:
exceedance probability flood event (or alternative and liveability; and
height above the defined flood event as defined in an c) demonstrate that the dam, crossing or rural drain
h) In the early stages of the planning process, ensure
endorsed floodplain development strategy); does not result in unacceptable on-site or off-site
that:
impacts.
e) consider the flood risk management principles when
i. sufficient land is set aside for stormwater and
replacing existing development within a floodway; Local planning schemes and/or local planning policies
groundwater management; and
and should, in accordance with the Guidelines:
ii. water sensitive design is part of the integrated
f) be informed by advice from the Department of Water d) specify instances where the construction of
water management system.
and Environmental Regulation, if flooding is likely and dams, crossings and rural drains is exempt from
no flood mapping exists. development approval; and
Wastewater
e) outline development requirements for dams,
7.4 Infrastructure and supply i) Proposals are required to connect to or provide for
crossings and rural drains in response to local
reticulated sewerage where:
conditions.
Flooding dominated by riverine processes is addressed in
i. deemed reasonable;
section 7.3 Riverine flooding.
Stormwater and groundwater
ii. required on planning grounds; or
Water demand and supply
Proposals should, in accordance with the Guidelines:
iii. the decision maker determines that the
Proposals should, in accordance with the Guidelines:
f) ensure stormwater and groundwater (including absence of reticulated sewerage will pose
a) minimise future water demand by ensuring that pluvial floodwaters) management systems are an unacceptable risk to public health, the
development is designed to conserve and use water designed and constructed in accordance with the environment or water resources.
efficiently; and Decision process for stormwater management in
Refer to the Guidelines for details on the assessment
Western Australia, Stormwater Management Manual
b) demonstrate secure, sustainable and fit-for-purpose of these criteria;
for Western Australia, the Australian Rainfall and Runoff
drinking and non-drinking water supply for domestic
Guidelines, and the Water Resource Considerations j) Proposals for on-site wastewater disposal1 may be
consumption, public open space irrigation and
when Controlling Groundwater Levels in Urban considered where the decision-maker is satisfied that:
industry. This should include consideration of future
rainfall projections that incorporate climate change Development, and i. reticulated sewerage is not required in
and, where a licence is required, within water g) in consultation with the relevant water management accordance with measure 7.4 i) of this policy;
allocation limits. agency and/or infrastructure manager(s), provide for ii. each lot can accommodate on-site wastewater
the retention, detention, conveyance and treatment disposal in accordance with AS/NZS 1547
(where required) of stormwater and manage On-site domestic wastewater management
groundwater inundation, including treatment of where relevant;
1 On-site disposal of trade waste to be managed in accordance with an
industry regulation approval under the Environmental Protection Act
1986, where relevant.

State Planning Policy 2.9
6
Water
December 2025
iii. the site requirements for on-site wastewater Proposals should, in accordance with the Guidelines: The Metropolitan Region Scheme (MRS) and
disposal outlined in the Guidelines can be met; corresponding local planning schemes should, in
a) be consistent with Water Quality Protection Note
and accordance with the Guidelines:
No.25: Land use compatibility tables for public drinking
iv. development will be serviced by an appropriate water source areas. Proposals inconsistent with this g) include Priority 1 areas within the Water Catchment
on-site wastewater system, which will manage document should not be supported; reservation;
risk to the environment and public health where
b) identify public drinking water source area boundaries, h) include Priority 2 areas within the ‘Rural-Water
relevant.
priority areas, wellhead protection zones, reservoir Protection’ zone (or equivalent);
k) Proposals are, in accordance with the guidelines, protection zones and water off-take points (that is,
i) identify Priority 3* areas as Special Control Area (or
encouraged to incorporate the beneficial use and reservoirs and abstraction bores);
equivalent) in the local planning scheme; and
reuse of wastewater; and
c) include measures to address risk to the drinking water
j) include provisions in the local planning scheme for
l) local planning schemes should, in accordance with resource. These measures should be incorporated into
Priority 3 areas.
the Guidelines, require the provision of reticulated a Water Management Report where required;
sewerage where appropriate. Region schemes and local planning schemes outside the
d) provide for connection to reticulated sewerage for all
MRS area should, in accordance with the Guidelines:
urban and industrial subdivisions;
7.5 Specific area measures: Public drinking
k) assign zones and reserves which reflect the intent
water source areas e) where practical, maintain or increase native
of the public drinking water source area priority and
vegetation coverage to protect water quality; and
facilitate compatible land uses; and
In addition to all other measures contained in this policy,
f) be referred to the Department of Water and
l) identify and protect public drinking water source
the following policy measures apply to public drinking
Environmental Regulation and the relevant licensed
areas (Priority 1, 2 and 3) as Special Control Areas.
water source areas constituted under the Metropolitan
water service provider for advice, prior to making a
Water Supply, Sewerage, and Drainage Act 1909 or the determination on: Planning decisions involving the intensification of land
Country Areas Water Supply Act 1947 (identified on the uses in Priority 1 and 2 areas should be based on the
i. regional and sub-regional frameworks, region
policy map of Public Drinking Water Source Areas). following and in accordance with the Guidelines:
and local planning schemes and scheme
They may also be used for guidance within
amendments, planning strategies, precinct plans, m) there is a general presumption against the
non-constituted drinking water source areas such
activity centre plans and structure plans; intensification of land uses;
as remote communities, mine sites and catchments
identified as future public drinking water source areas. ii. subdivision applications inconsistent with n) proposals will be considered only where the land is
Water Quality Protection Note No.25: Land use located in the MRS area and has been identified for
The protection of public drinking water source areas
compatibility tables for public drinking water source development in the manner proposed through a
and other sources of public drinking water should
areas; and strategic planning document prepared by the WAPC,
not be compromised. There is a presumption against
such as a sub-regional planning framework or sub-
development or land uses that pose an increased risk to iii. development applications involving a use
regional structure plan; and
public drinking water source areas. class listed as ‘incompatible’, ‘compatible with
conditions’, or not identified in Water Quality
Protection Note No.25: Land use compatibility tables
for public drinking water source areas.

State Planning Policy 2.9
7
Water
December 2025
o) planning decisions should give due regard to – animal establishments or rural pursuits that exceed areas are identified on the policy map of Swan Canning
the detailed assessment of the associated risk to recommended stocking rates River System).
the drinking water source. Criteria to inform this
In this regard: Proposals should, in accordance with the Guidelines:
assessment are provided in the Guidelines.
– the use of closed agricultural systems is a) maintain and enhance the ecological and
Justification is to be provided in the instance a Special
encouraged; hydrological functions of the river system, and
Control Area is not proposed. Justification should address
demonstrate detrimental impacts have been
elements such as the size of the public drinking water – there is a presumption against non-closed
prevented;
source area, the site context and whether other sources of agricultural systems on sites with low or very low
water are available. capability land for the intended land use or sites b) demonstrate a benefit to the community and a
prone to nutrient export; and functional need to be located within the river and/or
7.6 Specific area measures: Peel-Harvey foreshore reserves, where the proposal is located on
– in all other instances, applicants should
coastal plain catchment public land;
demonstrate that nutrient export will be
managed within acceptable levels. c) maintain and enhance public access to and along
In addition to all other measures contained in this policy,
the rivers and its foreshores, including through the
Region and local planning schemes and local planning
specifically 7.2 water quality, the following measures apply
establishment of foreshore reserves;
policies, should in accordance with the Guidelines:
to planning proposals in the Peel-Harvey coastal plain
d) consider the importance of the river as a strategic
catchment (identified on the policy map of Peel-Harvey e) identify the Peel-Harvey coastal plain catchment in
water transport network for commercial and
Coastal Plain Catchment). scheme maps; and
recreational use;
Proposals should, in accordance with the Guidelines: f) include specific provisions in scheme text to protect
e) maintain and enhance the natural landscape
water resources.
a) have regard to the water quality objectives contained
character and sense of place of the river system;
in Environmental Protection (Peel Inlet – Harvey Estuary)
7.7 Specific area measures: f) maintain and enhance views of the Swan Canning
Policy 1992 for the Peel Harvey estuarine system;
Swan Canning river system river system from public places;
b) protect remnant vegetation and maintain or increase
g) Identify Whadjuk Noongar Aboriginal heritage and
deep-rooted perennial vegetation coverage to
In addition to all other measures contained in this policy,
use best endeavours to protect, avoid or minimise
improve water quality;
the following measures apply to planning proposals
harm consistent with the Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972;
c) protect and revegetate waterways and drains with within the Swan Canning river system, which are wholly
endemic plant species to improve the values to or partially within, abut the water or land of the Swan h) protect, maintain or increase vegetation coverage
the Peel-Harvey estuarine system and/or manage Canning Development Control Area (DCA) or are, in the (preferably with endemic species); and
discharge into or from rural drains to reduce nutrient opinion of the WAPC, likely to affect the waters of the i) maintain or establish ecological and public open
export; and DCA. space linkages to the Swan Canning river system for
d) manage nutrient export when they involve: The Swan Canning river system refers to the catchment wildlife habitat and movement and natural water
areas of the Swan, Canning, Helena, Southern and Avon flows.
– agriculture – intensive
(to Moondyne Brook) rivers. The DCA was established in
– animal husbandry – intensive the Swan and Canning Rivers Management Act 2006 (both

State Planning Policy 2.9
8
Water
December 2025
8 DEFINITIONS Floodplain: the area inundated in a flood event on a On-site wastewater disposal: disposal of wastewater
waterway, which may include the floodway and flood within the boundaries of the freehold lot or survey strata
Agriculture – intensive: has the same meaning as fringe areas. For land planning purposes, the one per cent within which the wastewater was generated.
the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) (1 in 100) Annual Exceedance Probability flood event is
On-site wastewater system: a wastewater treatment
Regulations 2015. typically adopted.
and disposal or reuse system that receives, treats and
Animal husbandry – intensive: has the same meaning Floodway: the area of land that would be affected applies wastewater to a land application area within the
as the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) by river flooding in a one percent (one in 100) Annual boundaries of the freehold lot or survey strata within
Regulations 2015. Exceedance Probability flood event for a waterway. which wastewater was generated.
This area is generally a high flood risk area where
Closed agricultural system: a system of intensive Priority agricultural land: has the same meaning as
floodwaters are flowing fast and deep.
agricultural production or animal husbandry where there State Planning Policy 2.5 Rural Planning.
is zero or minimal discharge of nutrient-rich liquid or Flood fringe: the area of land that would be affected
Priority areas: Priority 1, 2, 3 and 3* areas assigned by
solids or non-nutrient contaminants to the immediate by river flooding in a one percent (one in 100) Annual
the Department of Water and Environmental Regulation
environment. Nutrient-enriched liquid and solids waste Exceedance Probability flood event but not designated as
to guide land use and management decisions in public
and non-nutrient contaminants are removed from the floodway.
drinking water source areas, in accordance with
property and disposed in an environmentally safe manner.
Foreshore area: the land that adjoins or directly Water Quality Protection Note No.25: Land use compatibility
Crossing: a structure or works such as a ford or low-level influences a waterway. It is the area of transition tables for public drinking water source areas.
crossing, culvert, causeway or bridge to allow a waterway between the edge of the waterway channel and the
Protection zones: Wellhead protection zones and
to be crossed from one waterway bank to another by a farthest extent of riparian vegetation, the floodplain and
reservoir protection zones that surround drinking water
track, road, pipeline or railway. riverine landforms; or a negotiated area endorsed by
off-take points assigned by the Department of Water
the Department of Water and Environmental Regulation
Dam: any artificial structure, barrier or levee, whether and Environmental Regulation, in accordance with
(and on the advice of the Department of Biodiversity,
temporary or permanent, which does or could impound, Water Quality Protection Note No.25: Land use compatibility
Conservation and Attractions where it relates to the Swan
divert or control water, silt, debris or liquid-borne tables for public drinking water source areas.
Canning Development Control Area).
materials, together with its appurtenant (associated)
Public drinking water source area: underground
works. Foreshore reserve: all or part of a foreshore area
water pollution control areas, catchment areas and water
publicly owned and vested with a local government
Ecological linkages: a series of (contiguous and non- reserves constituted under the Metropolitan Water Supply,
or State Government department. It may be reserved
contiguous) patches which, by virtue of their proximity to Sewerage, and Drainage Act 1909 or the Country Areas
under a planning scheme, for purposes such as foreshore
each other, act as stepping stones of habitat that facilitate Water Supply Act 1947.
protection or foreshore protection and public recreation.
the maintenance of ecological process and the movement
Public health: has the same meaning as Public Health Act
of organisms within, and across, a landscape. Guidelines: refers to Water Guidelines.
2016.
Flood prone area: Land susceptible to inundation by Groundwater: the area of an aquifer in which all pores
Reticulated sewerage: a network of sewers and
the probable maximum flood event. Generally used and fractures are saturated with water. Also known as
associated wastewater treatment plant managed by a
interchangeably with floodplain. water in the phreatic zone.
sewerage service provider.

State Planning Policy 2.9
9
Water
December 2025
•
Rural drain: is an artificial or constructed system of within 1km up groundwater gradient and 250m Stormwater: water that flows over ground surfaces and
structures used to move and manage groundwater or down groundwater gradient of a significant wetland; in natural streams and drains, as a direct result of rainfall
surface water in a rural landscape or catchment. or where the groundwater gradient is unknown over a catchment. Stormwater consists of rainfall runoff
or seasonably variable within one kilometre of the and any material (soluble and insoluble) mobilised in its
Sensitive water resource areas: areas where
significant wetland; path of flow.
development has the potential to affect water-dependent
•
ecosystems, natural waterways and estuaries, wetlands habitats of specially protected water-dependent Trade waste2: any wastewater, discharged from a
and selected coastal inlets and embayment, which have fauna and the area within 1km of groundwater- business or industry, aside from that which comes from
been recognised at either the State or National level as dependent threatened ecological communities staff amenities or office facilities.
having high ecological, social, cultural and/or economic and groundwater dependent priority ecological
Wastewater: sewage, not including stormwater, surface
values and are sensitive to contamination associated with communities; and
water or ground water of a type ordinarily drained from
land use and development. They include: •
wild rivers catchments. land as part of the provision of a drainage service. This
•
estuary catchments on the Swan and Scott Coastal includes trade waste.
Site-specific assessments undertaken during the planning
Plains;
process may identify additional significant water Water management report: is a document that
•
land that drains to and is within 2km of Irwin Inlet, resources. addresses all water- related matters relevant to a planning
Wilson Inlet, Torbay Inlet, Manarup Lagoon, Lake proposal to demonstrate the appropriate protection,
The sensitive water resource area boundaries are
Powell, Princess Royal Harbour and Oyster Harbour; management and use of water resources commensurate
identified on the policy map of Sensitive Water Resource
• with the level of risk to and from water resources from the
land that drains to and is within 2km of the estuarine Areas and may be refined through higher resolution
planning activity.
areas of the following: Dampier Creek (Broome), mapping in accordance with the definition provided
Hill River, Irwin River (Mid West), Margaret River above. Water resources: includes watercourses, waterways
(South West), Murchison River, Hardy Inlet, Chapman and their estuaries, inlets and floodplains, wetlands,
Sewage: any kind of sewage, faecal matter or urine, and
River, Walpole-Nornalup Inlet, Wellstead Estuary and groundwater, surface water, stormwater and drainage. A
any waste composed wholly or in part of liquid.
Greenough River; water resource includes all aspects of the water resource,
• Significant wetland: include Ramsar Wetlands and including water, organisms and other components and
land that drains to and is within 2km of the following
those listed in the Australian Government’s Directory of ecosystems that contribute to the physical condition and
coastal embayments: Cockburn Sound, Coral Bay,
Important Wetlands in Australia; wetlands categorised as ecological health of the water resource.
Cowaramup Bay, Flinders Bay, Geographe Bay, Jurien
Conservation Category in the Department of Biodiversity,
Bay, Koombana Bay, Mangles Bay, Peaceful Bay, Water service provider: a person or entity providing
Conservation and Attractions Swan Coastal Plain wetlands
Roebuck Bay, Shark Bay (south of the northern tip of water services under and in accordance with the Water
dataset, wetlands listed in the South Coast Significant
Peron Peninsula) and Warnbro Sound; Service Act 2012.
Wetlands dataset, other endorsed wetland dataset and
•
land that drains to and is within 1km of other other wetlands identified for protection during the land
estuarine areas, except for portions approved by planning process.
Government for uses such as ports;
2 On-site disposal of trade waste to be managed in accordance with an
industry regulation approval under the Environmental Protection Act
1986, where relevant.

State Planning Policy 2.9
10
Water
December 2025
Waterway: any river, creek, stream or brook, including its
foreshore area or reserve, floodplain, estuary and inlet.
This includes systems that flow permanently, for part of
the year or occasionally; and parts of the waterway that
have been artificially modified.
Wetland: an area of seasonally, intermittently or
permanently waterlogged or inundated land, whether
natural or otherwise, and includes a lake, swamp, marsh,
spring, dampland and sumplands.
Wetland buffer: an area of terrestrial land immediately
surrounding a wetland that provides spatial separation
between the wetland and adjacent land use(s).