Development Control Policy 1.3
Strata Titles
Background notes 2
1 Introduction 3
2 Policy objectives 4
3 Policy measures 4
3.1 General requirements 4
3.2 Procedure for approvals 4
3.3 Vacant strata and survey strata title lots 5
3.4 Strata titled caravan parks 7
3.5 Strata titles in rural areas 7
4 Implementation of policy 7
4.1 Planning appeals 7
4.2 Reconsiderations 7
Appendix 1 - Examples of strata title schemes 8
June 2009

Background notes
1 This policy deals with those classes of strata title proposals
which require the approval of the Western Australian Planning
Commission (WAPC) and sets out the criteria to be used in the
determination of applications for that approval. It does not apply
to all strata title proposals, many of which are delegated to the
relevant local government or exempt from needing WAPC approval.
2 The WAPC reconsidered and revised this policy in:
• May 1998 to take account of the Strata Titles Amendment
Act 1995. The affect of legislative changes on WAPC
policy and practices was described in Planning Bulletin 14
Amendments to Strata Titles Act May 1996, and Planning Bulletin
19 Strata Titles Amendment Act 1996 - Update on Policy
and Practice February 1997.
• September 2003 to clarify the relationship of the WAPC’s
policy with the WAPC’s policies on subdivision.
• June 2009 to address the delegation of WAPC powers and
functions to local government under section 25 of the Strata
Titles Act 1985 for ‘built’ strata applications, subject to
exceptions and conditions, and to correct outdated legislative
references.
3 Related policies are:
Development Control Policy 2.2 Residential Subdivision
Development Control Policy 2.3 Public Open Space in Residential Areas
Development Control Policy 2.6 Residential Road Planning
Development Control Policy 3.4 Rural Land Use Planning Policy
Guidelines for the Design and Geometric Layout of Residential Roads
2 Development Control Policy 1.3 Strata Titles June 2009

1 Introduction iv it relates to a land parcel which does
not exceed 2,500 square metres in
1.1 The use of strata titles in the State has area; or
developed from the fairly simple concepts
v it relates to land within an urban zone
of the Strata Titles Act 1966, when it
and to development which conforms
applied solely to buildings and almost
with an approved local planning
exclusively to multi-storey buildings by
scheme, or where no scheme exists,
allowing title to parts of each floor (or
it relates to land within a gazetted
stratum) level. The concept has been
townsite.
expanded to include vertical divisions
between buildings, such as terraced
The appropriate local government is
housing and through the Strata Titles
required by the Strata Titles Act to certify
Act 1985, provided for the division of
that a given strata plan is exempt from the
land and buildings. The Strata Titles
need to obtain the approval of the WAPC.
Amendment Act 1995, changed the way
the WAPC dealt with existing forms of
1.4 The WAPC has delegated its powers
strata, introduced a new form of strata
and functions to consider built strata
title and provided new instruments for
applications to local government. The
the management of strata schemes.
instrument of delegation gazetted on the
In view of difficulties experienced by
9 June 2009 delegates to local
some landowners with the boundaries
governments and to members and officers
of strata lots and common property,
of those local governments the powers and
and the requirements for insurance, the
functions of the WAPC under section 25
Strata Titles Act was amended further to
of the Strata Titles Act 1985 to determine
simplify strata titles by the Strata Titles
applications for the issuing of a certificate
Amendment Act 1996.
of approval for a plan of subdivision, re-
subdivision or consolidation, except those
1.2 There are very few forms of
applications that:
land and building divisions to which strata
titles cannot be applied - examples of
i propose the creation of a vacant lot;
the variety of strata schemes considered
by the WAPC since July 1985 are set out
ii propose vacant air stratas in multi-tiered
in appendix 1 of this policy.
strata scheme developments;
1.3 The Strata Titles Amendment Act 1995,
iii in the opinion of the WAPC as notified
introduced survey strata lots. These lots
to the relevant local government in
consist of surveyed land boundaries (as
writing, relate to
against building parcels which occur
with strata title subdivisions involving
a) a type of development; and/or
buildings only). On plan, a survey strata
subdivision will have a similar appearance
b) land within an area,
to a conventional subdivision although it
may include ‘common property’ and have
which is of state or regional significance,
an ongoing relationship between the other
or in respect of which the WAPC has
lots created on the same survey strata
determined is otherwise in the public
plan.
interest for the WAPC to determine the
application.
Under regulation 15 of the Strata Title
General Regulations 1996, WAPC
1.5 While the range of uses for strata titles
approval for strata subdivision is not
gradually has been expanded, the separate
required when:
approval of the WAPC is no longer needed
for the most common form of strata title.
i it relates to residential developments;
The purpose of this policy is to set out
the policy requirements of the WAPC for
ii it relates to a development containing
those forms of strata titles that require
no more than five dwelling units;
its approval. The WAPC is conscious,
however, that the provisions of the current
iii each strata lot contains one existing
Act offer scope for a range of innovative
dwelling unit;
Development Control Policy 1.3 Strata Titles June 2009 3

uses for this form of titling, which may land parcel, eg that land required for
necessitate the modification or expansion road widening or for public open space
of this policy from time to time. be ceded free of cost to the Crown. In
these cases, because subdivision by
2 Policy objectives strata scheme is not subdivision for the
purposes of sections 135 and 136 of the
Planning and Development Act 2005, it
• To clarify the procedure for the issue
may be necessary to require a subdivision
of certificate of approval to strata title
application to be submitted and approved
proposals.
by the WAPC to excise from the parent lot
• To establish criteria for the the land required for a public purpose with
determination of applications for the the result that the strata scheme will relate
certificate of approval to strata title to the residual parcel.
proposals.
3.2 Procedure for approvals
• To ensure a consistent approach in the
principles of subdivision control with 3.2.1 Section 25 (3) of the Strata Titles Act
particular regard to the amenity of the 1985, clearly contemplates that unless
neighbourhood. special circumstances exist, all certificate
of approval applications be lodged prior to
the commencement of any development
3 Policy measures
whether it is a new proposal or it involves
modification to or adaptation of an existing
3.1 General requirements
building. The WAPC expects that the tenor
of the Act will be complied with.
3.1.1 In its consideration of applications for
certificate of approval, as required by
3.2.2 The WAPC will consider all strata
section 25 of the Strata Titles Act 1985,
subdivision having regard to this policy
the WAPC will apply the following criteria:
and to advice received from the relevant
local government and servicing agencies.
a) The development proposed for strata
The WAPC must be satisfied that all strata
titles is, or will be, in accordance with
proposals comply with the provisions of the
all relevant provisions of the local
local government local planning scheme
government local planning scheme.
and that the lots proposed will be capable
of development.
b) The proposed strata subdivision will not
affect a subdivision of land in situations
3.2.3 The WAPC is required to refer applications
where the WAPC would not grant the
for a vacant strata lot to affected authorities
approval required by section 135 of the
as set out in section 142 of the Planning
Planning and Development Act 2005.
and Development Act 2005. The WAPC is
responsible for the clearance of conditions,
c) The division by strata of the
in the same way as for conventional
development is consistent with long-
subdivision.
term planning goals and objectives for
the area concerned.
3.2.4 The creation of survey strata lots will be
dealt with under part 10 of the Planning
d) The proposal is consistent with the
and Development Act 2005, which means
policies of the WAPC regarding
the full involvement and responsibility of
subdivision, and in particular, the
the WAPC, to the same extent as with the
standards for roads, public open space
creation of conventional lots. Accordingly,
and residential design.
the WAPC is able to impose conditions,
including the setting aside and vesting of
3.1.2 Given the increased scope for the use
reserves where appropriate.
of strata schemes, especially for land
and buildings to be divided in a manner
3.2.5 With respect to dimensions and areas
similar to that involved in conventional
of proposed lots and their relationship to
subdivision, it is inevitable that
the State Planning Policy 3.1 Residential
circumstances will arise where a strata
Design Codes (Variation 1) (R-Codes), the
scheme will be found to be acceptable
WAPC will treat applications for vacant
only on conditions that affect the parent
strata or survey strata subdivision which
4 Development Control Policy 1.3 Strata Titles June 2009

include common property on Residential 3.3.4 In the case of the creation of vacant strata
zoned land as proposals to accommodate subdivision or survey strata lots, the WAPC
grouped dwellings and not single houses. must be satisfied on a number of points:
3.3 Vacant strata and survey strata Residential
title lots
a) The proposed lot or lots will not result
3.3.1 Strata schemes may show the creation in any conflict with any statutory
of vacant strata title lots, provided that requirements or provisions of a local
there is at least one building on any land planning scheme, including residential
parcel in the scheme. Alternatively, survey densities applicable to the land
strata title lots consisting of surveyed land involved.
boundaries may be created and there may
b) The proposal will not conflict with the
or may not be buildings on the land but
government’s sewerage policies.
the buildings do not form part of the strata
scheme. This brings such schemes very
c) The proposed lot or lots will be provided
closely in line with conventional freehold
with all appropriate public services,
subdivisions. The WAPC believes that
particularly a reticulated water supply
although the strata subdivision system is
and, where available, reticulated
more flexible than freehold subdivision,
deep sewerage facilities. Where deep
there are considerations which will be
sewerage is not available and cannot
applicable to both.
be made available at reasonable cost,
the WAPC will want to be satisfied that
3.3.2 For vacant strata and survey strata lots
the soil conditions, water table levels
there generally will be a need to consider
and amount of land area available for
full servicing (including water, sewer,
on-site disposal of wastewater are
drainage and fill, and provision of access
appropriate for the effective operation of
to a constructed road) of each individual
on-site wastewater disposal systems.
lot, particularly where lots are not already
developed (and therefore not serviced),
d) The proposed lot or lots are of
and where they may become distanced
such a shape and size as to permit
or separated from service connections
development in accordance with
by intervening lots in the same strata or
appropriate development standards
survey strata scheme.
and in the case of infill survey
strata development, have a positive
3.3.3 Consistent with legislation, policy and
relationship to the prevailing street
practice in respect of conventional
block pattern and the amenity of the
subdivision, for a proposal involving more
surrounding residential properties. In
than a small number of lots, the WAPC
the case of survey strata lots of less that
may require a contribution towards the
350 square metres in area, the WAPC
provision of public facilities, such as open
may require information regarding the
space, school sites and the like. The
arrangement of existing and proposed
WAPC may allow a maximum of 50 per
buildings, fences, driveways and other
cent of the total 10 per cent public open
development on the land to enable the
space to be provided as communal open
relationship between the subdivision and
space within the survey strata subdivision
development to be properly assessed in
subject to the open space being useable
accordance with Development Control
and developed for general recreation
Policy 2.2 Residential Subdivision.
purposes. The remainder of the provision
may be provided outside of the subdivision
e) The proposed lot or lots will have
or by way of cash-in-lieu. The WAPC
adequate access and will be able
will allow up to 20 per cent of the 10 per
to accommodate car parking in
cent contribution to be in the allocation
accordance with the relevant standards.
of a site for community facilities, which
Driveways for survey stratas up to
may include buildings, providing the site
six dwellings should be designed in
is credited towards the communal open
accordance with the R-Codes. Access
space. Cash-in-lieu could be provided in
ways for survey stratas in excess of
the same manner as it is with conventional
six dwellings should be designed in
subdivision.
Development Control Policy 1.3 Strata Titles June 2009 5

accordance with Development Control conventional applications for subdivision
Policy 2.6 Residential Road Planning (ie applications may be refused on
and the Guidelines for the Design planning grounds or approved subject to
and Geometric Layout of Residential conditions relating to road construction,
Roads, with provision for the road provision of services and/or public open
pavement and verges for pedestrian space, and the draining and filling of land)
access, landscape and public utilities. to ensure consistency of approach and
Verge widths may be reduced if that the provisions of the Strata Titles Act
acceptable alternative provision for are not used to circumvent the normal
pedestrian access, landscape and requirements of subdivision. However,
utility provision is made. since roads and services within a strata
scheme are private, it is accepted that
f) In respect of larger schemes, that participants within any such scheme
adequate road access will be should have some flexibility in determining
available and that the scheme, if the standards that they require for those
approved, complies with the standard services, eg the width, alignment, parking
requirements with respect to the and drainage of roads and driveways
provision of public open space. Also, where these do not directly affect public
the WAPC will ensure that any such facilities or other adjoining land.
strata scheme does not prejudice the
proper overall planning of a locality, 3.3.7 There may be circumstances where the
in particular the establishment of an WAPC believes that a proposal to create
effective road network to and within vacant strata or survey strata lots is not
that locality. acceptable, and that the subdivision
should take the form of a conventional
Non-residential lot subdivision. In instances where it is
proposed to create a large number of lots
a) The proposed lot or lots will be capable which could raise issues such as access
of development in accordance with for emergency services, public access
the provisions of the local planning and the distribution of public facilities, or
scheme, including compliance with the where a proposal circumvents the normal
appropriate development standards. requirements of subdivision, the WAPC
may consider that the proposal should
b) The proposed lot or lots will be capable proceed as a conventional subdivision.
of being appropriately serviced,
particularly with reticulated water and, 3.3.8 The WAPC may require the preparation of
if relevant, deep sewerage facilities. a management statement as a mechanism
In the absence of deep sewerage, the for introducing additional by-laws for a
WAPC will wish to satisfy itself that strata scheme at the time the scheme
land areas and soil conditions are such is registered. Management statements
as to ensure effective operation of on- may be required by the WAPC as a
site wastewater disposal systems. condition of strata scheme or survey strata
scheme approval where detailed ongoing
3.3.5 In order to satisfy itself with respect to management arrangements are required.
these matters, the WAPC may require the Management statements may be of
submission of concept or sketch plans particular value in ensuring that standards
showing a form of development which of design and amenity are met.
complies with all relevant development
standards and requirements, and also may 3.3.9 The WAPC may impose conditions
undertake consultation with other affected requiring preparation and enforcement
bodies. In the latter regard, while every of development guidelines by way of
endeavour will be made to determine each restrictive covenants under section 129A
such application within the 40-day period of the Transfer of Land Act 1893 and/or
prescribed for a decision, consultation construction to plate height in accordance
may necessitate a longer period. with Development Control Policy 2.2.
Residential Subdivision.
3.3.6 All strata schemes, particularly those
involving the creation of vacant strata title
lots, will be examined in a similar way as
6 Development Control Policy 1.3 Strata Titles June 2009

3.4 Strata titled caravan parks application within 40 days of receiving the
application for built stratas, and 90 days for
The strata titling of caravan parks is vacant lot stratas
precluded by the Caravan and Camping
Grounds Act 1995. The WAPC will not 4.1.2 Survey stratas
grant any further approvals for the strata
titling of caravan parks. Proposals for Survey stratas are determined under
short-stay residential accommodation part 10 of the Planning and Development
which do not fall within the definition of a Act 2005. An application for review is
caravan park may be approved for strata made to the State Administrative Tribunal
title. Such applications and developments under section 251 of this Act and must be
will be assessed on their merits and lodged within 28 days of the date of the
having regard to the local government WAPC’s determination. An application
local planning scheme. for review may also be lodged within 28
days of the WAPC’s failure to determine a
3.5 Strata titles in rural areas proposal within 90 days of the receipt of an
application.
The WAPC’s Development Control Policy
3.4. Subdivision of Rural Land provides 4.2 Reconsiderations
a framework for planning in rural areas.
Emphasis is placed on rural strategies A request for reconsideration of a decision
as a mechanism for rational decision- or conditions imposed on a vacant lot
making for the future zoning, subdivision, strata or survey strata may be lodged with
strata titling and development of rural the WAPC within 28 days of the decision.
land. The general principles of the policy
apply equally to strata schemes and
conventional subdivisions. In considering
proposals for survey strata subdivision, in
combination with management statements
and restrictions under section 6 of the
Strata Titles Act, the appropriateness
of subdivision of rural land in any
particular area will remain a fundamental
consideration for the WAPC. The nexus
between land area (proposed lot sizes)
and the agricultural activity applicable
to the land, subject to an application to
subdivide, is an important aspect of this
consideration.
4 Implementation of policy
4.1 Planning appeals
4.1.1 Vacant and built stratas
Section 27 of the Strata Titles Act provides
for an application for review against a
decision of the WAPC to be made to
the State Administrative Tribunal within
30 days of the receipt of that decision,
or within 30 days of the expiration of
the period in which a decision on an
application is required to be made by the
WAPC. Applications for review also are
provided against a failure by the WAPC
to notify the applicant of its approval of an
Development Control Policy 1.3 Strata Titles June 2009 7

Appendix 1 - Examples of strata title schemes
The following are representative of some of the strata schemes which have been considered by
the WAPC since 1 July 1985:
a) Conventional schemes
i) The division of multi-storey residential buildings into dwellings usually referred to as home
units.
ii) The division of multi-storey office buildings into separate office suites.
iii) The division of grouped housing projects into their component dwelling units.
iv) The division of shopping centres and warehouse/showroom/factory-unit development into
their component units.
b) Extensions to conventional schemes
i) The division of multiple and grouped housing projects but with allocation of land in the form
of gardens, courtyards, car parking spaces or garages as part of the lots.
ii) The division of grouped housing projects into lots only with no common property.
iii) The division of office buildings, shopping centres and industrial complexes into their
component units; each lot also containing service courts, parking spaces and loading
facilities etc.
c) New techniques and schemes
i) The division of land into vacant strata titled lots with private roads and infrastructure,
provided that there is at least one building on any parcel of land which is the subject of a
strata scheme.
ii) For equestrian centres, the division of land into strata lots with the exercise track, jumping
area etc set out as common property.
iii) The division of land associated with marinas for pens, clubrooms and storage areas.
iv) The division of motels to create lots for each motel unit.
v) The division of land into survey strata lots defined by surveyed land boundaries. No
buildings need to be shown on the plan, although this type of strata can be used where
there are existing buildings.
8 Development Control Policy 1.3 Strata Titles June 2009