December 2016
DC Policy
3.4
- Subdivision of rural land

Development Control Policy 3.4
- Subdivision of rural land
click to follow
Disclaimer
Contents
This document has been produced by the
Department of Planning on behalf of the
Western Australian Planning Commission. Any
Background 1 7. Other matters 6
representation, statement, opinion or advice
expressed or implied in this publication is 1. Introduction 2 7.1 Strata proposals 6
made in good faith and on the basis that the
Government, its employees and agents are 2. Policy objectives 2 7.2 Electricity 6
not liable for any damage or loss whatsoever
which may occur as a result of action taken or 3. Rural living 3 8. Information requirements 6
not taken, as the case may be, in respect of any
representation, statement, opinion or advice 4. Policy measures for more 9. Separate applications 6
referred to herein. Professional advice should intensive agricultural uses 3
Appendix 1: D efinitions 7
be obtained before applying the information
contained in this document to particular 5. General policy provisions 3
Appendix 2: H omestead lot policy area 8
circumstances.
6. Circumstances where rural
Appendix 3: A dditional information
subdivision may be considered 3
© Western Australian Planning Commission to support subdivision
6.1 Significant physical divisions 4 applications 9
Published by the
Western Australian Planning Commission 6.2 Subdivision for other purposes 4
Gordon Stephenson House
140 William Street 6.3 Property rationalisation to improve
Perth WA 6000 land management 4
Locked Bag 2506
6.4 Conservation of heritage
Perth WA 6001
buildings and places 4
Published December 2016
6.5 Conservation of biodiversity
website: www.planning.wa.gov.au
email: corporate@planning.wa.gov.au and natural heritage 5
tel: 08 6551 9000 6.6 Homestead lots 6
fax: 08 6551 9001
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
infoline: 1800 626 477
This document is available in alternative formats
on application to Communication Services.

DC Policy
3.4
1
- Subdivision of rural land
Background
This policy supersedes Development Control Policy Groundwater Protection; State Planning Policy 2.3:
3.4: Subdivision of rural land (DC 3.4) (March 2012). Jandakot Groundwater Protection; State Planning
The Western Australian Planning Commission Policy 2.10: Swan Canning River System; and State
(WAPC) is the responsible authority for subdivision Planning Policy 2.9: Water Resources.
approvals in Western Australia. This policy sets out
the principles that will be used by the WAPC in Alternatively, specific areas may require consideration
determining applications for the subdivision of rural of policies and instruments such as State Planning
land. The policy is consistent with the objectives Policy 2.1: Peel-Harvey Coastal Plain Catchment, State
of State Planning Policy 2.5: Rural Planning, which Planning Policy 6.1: Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge and
establishes the statewide policy framework for rural the Greater Bunbury Region Scheme.
land use planning in Western Australia.
Guidance for the implementation of this policy, or
It is recognised that other policies and planning sections of this policy, is provided through planning
instruments will have a direct, or indirect, influence guidelines such as Better Urban Water Management,
on the implementation of this policy and as such, they Guidelines for Planning in Bushfire Prone Areas and
should be considered where relevant. the Rural Planning Guidelines.
The aims and objectives of the State Planning Strategy Planning policies and guidelines other than those
and State Planning Policy 1: State Planning Framework listed above may also contain provisions applicable
Policy are supported through the provisions of this to the subdivision of rural land and should be read in
policy. Subdivision and environmental planning conjunction with this policy, where appropriate.
proposals should consider policies such as State
Planning Policy 2: Environment and Natural
Resources Policy and Development Control Policy
1.1: Subdivision of Land - General Principles. Specific
matters such as industrial buffers and water resources
may be addressed in compliance with policies such
as State Planning Policy 4.1: State Industrial Buffer
Policy; State Planning Policy 2.7: Public Drinking Water
Source Policy; State Planning Policy 2.2: Gnangara
Western Australian Planning Commission - December 2016

DC Policy
3.4
2
- Subdivision of rural land
In determining subdivision applications, the WAPC
1. Introduction 2. Policy objectives
will seek to ensure that the broad objectives
contained in Section 2 of this policy are met and may
The changes to land use in Western Australia in the This operational policy guides the subdivision of rural
impose conditions on an approval to secure these
years since European settlement in 1829 have been land to achieve the key objectives of State Planning
objectives. In addition to the provisions of this policy
dramatic. Subdivision, development and use of land Policy 2.5: Rural Planning, which are to:
the WAPC will have due regard to:
for settlement and agriculture provided significant
(a) support existing, expanded and future primary
economic and social benefits to the State’s expanding • the provisions of a local planning scheme;
production through the protection of rural
community. This growth is anticipated to continue
• a local planning strategy or local land, particularly priority agricultural land and
with the State’s population expected to increase to
rural strategy; land required for animal premises and/or the
3.5 million people by 2050.
production of food;
• applicable region schemes;
Rural zones are generally flexible and permit a range
(b) provide investment security for existing,
• applicable regional strategies;
of agricultural, commercial and industrial land uses.
expanded and future primary production,
This policy aims to support the range of land uses that • relevant State planning and operational policies;
and promote economic growth and regional
are appropriate for rural settings, while limiting the
• the individual merits of the proposal; and development on rural land for rural land uses;
loss of this land to incompatible uses such as housing.
• existing precedent(s) or any potential precedent (c) outside of the Perth and Peel planning regions,
This policy is primarily concerned with those the proposal may create. secure significant basic raw material resources
matters contained in Part 10 of the Planning and and provide for their extraction;
Development Act 2005, which deals with the
subdivision of land separate from the Crown, and (d) provide a planning framework that
sets out the functions of the WAPC in its operation of comprehensively considers rural land and
that Part. For the purpose of the policy, subdivision land uses, and facilitates consistent and timely
includes the creation of a new lot or multiple lots; the decision-making;
amalgamation of existing lots; and any other dealings
(e) avoid and minimise land use conflicts;
in land that require a decision by the WAPC, including
the creation of survey strata lots. (f) promote sustainable settlement in, and adjacent
to, existing urban areas; and
(g) protect and sustainably manage environmental,
landscape and water resource assets.
Western Australian Planning Commission - December 2016

DC Policy
3.4
3
- Subdivision of rural land
3. Rural living 5. General policy provisions 6. Circumstances under which
rural subdivision may be
It is the policy of the WAPC that the subdivision of
It is the opinion of the WAPC that rural land uses are considered
rural land for rural living land uses must be properly
the highest and best use for rural zoned land. Where
planned through the preparation and endorsement
an alternative use is proposed, such as residential,
of strategies and schemes and be zoned accordingly In considering applications under section 6, the
the use must be planned in a strategy or scheme and
in local planning schemes prior to subdivision. WAPC will consider rural subdivision in the following
zoned accordingly.
exceptional circumstances:
Rural living is considered a residential land use and
When determining subdivision proposals on rural
not a rural land use. Therefore, this policy does not (a) to realign lot boundaries with no increase in the
land, the following measures will be applied:
apply to rural living proposals or subdivision. Rural number of lots, where the resultant lots will not
living policy is outlined in clause 5.3 of State Planning (a) the creation of new or smaller lots will be by adversely affect rural land uses;
Policy 2.5: Rural Planning. exception;
(b) to protect and actively conserve places
of cultural and natural heritage;
(b) proposals will be considered against strategies
and schemes;
4. Policy measures for more (c) to allow for the efficient provision of utilities
and infrastructure and/or for access to natural
intensive agricultural uses (c) adequate buffer distances for sensitive and/or
resources;
incompatible land uses can be achieved; and
It is the view of the WAPC that there is an existing (d) proposals will be assessed against any relevant
(d) in the Homestead lot policy area (Appendix 2),
to allow for the continued occupation of existing
supply of suitably sized and located rural lots to cater State planning policies and/or operational
homesteads when they are no longer used as
for intensive and emerging primary production land policies.
part of a farming operation; and
uses.
(e) for other unusual or unanticipated purposes
Where local conditions require subdivision or
which, in the opinion of the WAPC, do not
creation of land parcels for this purpose, it should
conflict with this and other relevant policies and
be provided for in a strategy or scheme and
are necessary to the public interest.
supported by evidence from the agency responsible
for agriculture and food. Creation of new rural lots
Although the WAPC seeks to minimise the creation
through ad-hoc, unplanned subdivision is considered
of new or smaller rural lots, there are some
to be inconsistent with or contrary to the objectives of
circumstances where subdivision may be appropriate
this policy.
in order to promote better land management and
achieve environmental, cultural and/or social benefits.
These forms of subdivision, which may result in
Western Australian Planning Commission - December 2016

DC Policy
3.4
4
- Subdivision of rural land
additional dwelling entitlements, are considered 6.2 Subdivision for other purposes (c) no new roads are created, unless supported by
to provide incentives for rural subdivision. As such the local government;
the remainder of this policy outlines the applicable
New lots for existing or proposed land uses such (d) new vehicle access points on State roads are
standards for rural subdivision.
as recreation facilities, public utilities, rehabilitation minimised; and
of degraded land, extractive industries, or uses
(e) rural living sized lots (1-40 hectares), created as
necessary to the rural use of the land such as abattoirs
6.1 Significant physical divisions
a result of the rationalisation, have appropriate
and processing works (including buffers), may be
buffer from adjoining farming uses and water
created through subdivision. The WAPC may approve
The existing physical division of a lot by a significant resources, and may have notifications placed on
subdivision for these purposes if a development
natural or constructed feature may be formalised title advising that the lot is in a rural area and may
approval has been granted, or where development of
through subdivision. The physical division in itself be impacted by primary production.
the intended land use has substantially commenced.
however, does not warrant the creation of additional
Where appropriate the WAPC may preclude sensitive
or smaller lots. A significant physical division would Former road reserves and small remnant portions
land uses on the new lot(s).
include, but not be limited to, a controlled access of lots are not considered lots for the purpose of
highway or a river but would not generally include The existence or approval of an ancillary dwelling, boundary rationalisation.
minor barriers such as rural roads or creeks that are aged persons dwelling or farm workers’ dwelling is
In instances where a subdivision only proposes to
commonly crossed for farm management purposes. not a satisfactory justification for subdivision, except
realign existing lot boundaries, where no change to
as provided for in clause 6.6.
The WAPC may support boundary realignment the land use and/or landform is proposed, and no
where a rural property comprises multiple small titles additional development is proposed, applications
and there is scope to resolve the physical division by 6.3 Property rationalisation to improve for property rationalisation may be unconditionally
rationalising multiple lots in one ownership through approved.
land management
boundary realignments, without creating additional
lots.
Many rural properties comprise multiple titles and
6.4 Conservation of heritage buildings
landowners may wish to subdivide to achieve better
Lot boundaries that result in encroachments may be and places
land management. Subdivision may also present
corrected through minor boundary realignments,
opportunities to create access to landlocked lots.
provided the realignments do not adversely affect
Multiple lots in one ownership may be rationalised Lots may be created to facilitate the conservation of a
environmentally sensitive areas or create additional or
provided that: heritage building or place provided that:
smaller lots.
(a) there is no increase in the number of lots; (a) the building, object or place is listed in the State
Register of Heritage Places, the Aboriginal Sites
(b) the new boundaries achieve improved
Register, the Heritage List in the local planning
environmental and land management practices
scheme, or has been assessed by a recognised
and minimise adverse impacts on rural land use;
Western Australian Planning Commission - December 2016

DC Policy
3.4
5
- Subdivision of rural land
heritage consultant as warranting heritage (ii) in-principle agreement to administer the (f) the balance lot is suitable for the continuation
protection; necessary conservation covenant. of the rural land use and retains where practical,
native or regenerated vegetation as an integral
(b) the subdivision is supported by the local (b) generally at least 85 per cent of the area of
part of sustainable primary production,
government; the conservation lot has high environmental
provided that this does not result in the division
values or is covered by endemic or regenerated
of significant endemic vegetation in order to
(c) the allotment is of sufficient size to contain its
vegetation and/or wetland;
include a portion of that vegetation within the
own impacts and will not adversely affect the
agricultural lot.
operation of neighbouring uses; (c) the proposed conservation lot has an
appropriate shape having regard for the
(d) a Conservation Plan formulated by an The creation of more than one conservation lot is
native vegetation, natural features, bush fire
appropriately qualified person, is submitted and inconsistent with the objectives of this policy. The
management, water resources, property
approved; and creation of multiple conservation lots will require
management and existing or proposed
land to be appropriately zoned as conservation
structures;
(e) any urgent works required for the preservation of
themed rural-residential or rural smallholdings with
buildings are completed prior to the creation of
(d) a conservation covenant in perpetuity with the conservation covenants and building envelopes
the lot(s).
Department of Parks and Wildlife, the National specified.
Trust of Australia (WA), or an alternative authority
acceptable to the WAPC, is registered on the The creation of conservation lots shall continue to be
6.5 Conservation of biodiversity and
certificate of title as a condition of subdivision considered in the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge policy
natural heritage for the proposed conservation lot and that the area in accordance with the land use strategies under
covenant includes provisions that: State Planning Policy 6.1: Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge
Policy.
Conservation lots may be created to conserve
(i) prohibit further clearing (other than for
significant environmental features and remnant
necessary land and fire management Following the creation of a lot under this clause, the
vegetation provided that:
requirements); resultant conservation lot should be appropriately
(a) the application includes advice from the (ii) clearly delineate a building envelope and/or zoned by the local government in the local planning
Department of Parks and Wildlife, National Trust building exclusion area which is also shown scheme in a future omnibus amendment or when the
of Australia (WA), or another relevant agency, on the subdivision plan; and scheme is reviewed.
endorsing the suitability of the new lot for the
(iii) prohibit stocking outside any existing
intended purpose of retaining environmental
cleared area.
values including:
(e) bushfire risk can be managed in accordance
(i) the adequacy of the lot size proposed
with WAPC guidelines without resulting in loss of
(if it is less than 40 hectares) to retain the
conservation values; and
conservation value in perpetuity; and
Western Australian Planning Commission - December 2016

DC Policy
3.4
6
- Subdivision of rural land
6.6 Homestead lots (f) the homestead lot contains an existing residence 7.2 Electricity
that can achieve an appropriate buffer from
adjoining rural land uses;
The creation of homestead lots is intended to allow WAPC policy is that servicing of lots be
primary producers to continue to occupy their (g) a homestead lot has not been excised from the commensurate with their intended land use. As such,
dwelling when they cease to farm, and provide farm in the past; some forms of rural subdivision may not require an
settlement opportunities in areas where land electricity supply to support the intended or existing
(h) the balance lot is suitable for the continuation
fragmentation is limited and unlikely to increase. land use. Section 6.5.1 of State Planning Policy 2.5:
of the rural land use, and generally consistent
Homestead lots are to be created in a manner that is Rural Planning outlines WAPC’s policy in regards to
with prevailing lot sizes, where it can be shown
consistent with the rural character and landscape of electricity requirements.
that this is consistent with the current farming
a locality. Homestead lots may be facilitated through
practices at the property; and
boundary rationalisation or the creation of a new lot.
(i) the dwelling on a homestead lot must be of a 8. Information requirements
Homestead lots may therefore be created to enable
habitable standard and may be required to be
an approved existing house on a rural lot to continue
certified as habitable by the local government.
to be occupied provided that: In considering applications for the subdivision of
rural land, the WAPC requires adequate information
Where there are a number of existing approved
(a) the land is in the DC 3.4 Homestead lot policy
on which to base its decisions and may require
dwellings on a rural lot, more than one homestead lot
area (refer Appendix 2);
applicants to address any or all relevant matters from
may be considered as a one-off application.
the list at Appendix 3.
(b) the homestead lot has an area between one and
four hectares, or up to 20 hectares to respond
Where required information is not provided the
to the landform and include features such as
7. Other matters application may be considered non-compliant until
existing outbuildings, services or water sources;
such time as the information is provided.
(c) there is an adequate water supply for domestic, 7.1 Strata proposals
land management and fire management
purposes; This form of subdivision may be appropriate to 9. Separate applications
achieve land management or environmental
(d) the dwelling is connected to a reticulated
protection objectives.
electricity supply or an acceptable alternative is Separate subdivision applications are required
demonstrated; where there are separate groups of lots which are in
Strata proposals that increase dwelling entitlements
different ownerships or which do not form part of one
(e) the homestead lot has access to a constructed on rural land are considered rural living and will
contiguous landholding.
public road; be assessed in accordance with clause 5.3 of State
Planning Policy 2.5: Rural Planning.
Western Australian Planning Commission - December 2016

DC Policy
3.4
7
- Subdivision of rural land
Appendix 1
Definitions Homestead lot
Uses shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the
A small lot generally ranging from one to four
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
hectares, but may be up to 20 hectares in size
Regulations 2015 made under Part 15 Division 1 of
depending on site specific circumstances, which
the Planning and Development Act 2005 and State
is excised from a larger farm holding for separate
Planning Policy 2.5: Rural Planning unless defined
occupation, such as by a retiring farmer wishing to
below.
remain in an approved existing dwelling.
Conservation covenant
Restrictive covenant
A conservation covenant is an agreement between a
A notice on a Certificate of Title restricting the use or
landowner and a designated conservation covenant
enjoyment of certain land for the benefit of other land
agency such as the National Trust or an environmental
and binding on every owner of the burdened land
agency, which protects and enhances the natural
having notice of the covenant.
and cultural values of the land. The conservation
covenant is restrictive in effect and is registered on
A covenant indicates to owners and prospective
the property, binding all future owners. Conservation
purchasers that pre-existing conditions relating to
covenants have the force of statute, and should be
the subject land may influence the ability to use and
distinguished from common law covenants. Unlike
develop the land.
common law covenants, conservation covenants are
generally permanent ‘in perpetuity’.
Water supply - non-potable
Water required outside the dwelling which may
include, but is not limited to, firefighting, stock,
horticulture, domestic gardens,
re-vegetation and wash down areas.
Western Australian Planning Commission - December 2016

DC Policy
3.4
8
- Subdivision of rural land
Appendix 2
Homestead lot policy area
1 NORTHAMPTON (S) 34 NAREMBEEN (S)
N 2 CHAPMAN VALLEY (S) 35 BRUCE ROCK (S)
0 50 100 150 200 250 3 GREATER GERALDTON (S) 36 QUAIRADING (S)
kilometres 4 IRWIN (S) 37 YORK (S)
1 Produced by GeoSpatial Research and Modelling, 5 MINGENEW (S) 38 BEVERLEY (S)
D W e e p s a te rt r m n e A n u t s o tr f a P lia la n n n P i l n a g n n W in A g , C on o m be m h is a s lf io o n f the 6 MORAWA (S) 39 BROOKTON (S)
2 Copyright © October 2016 40 WANDERING (S)
7 THREE SPRINGS (S)
3 \\dopgisfilesvr01\iProducts\ 41 PINGELLY (S)
StateMultiregion\DC34SubdivisionOfRuralLand\ 8 PERENJORI (S)
Geraldton DevelopmentControlApplication3_4.mxd 42 CORRIGIN (S)
9 CARNAMAH (S)
5 6 B W a e s s e t e in rn fo A rm us a t t r i a o l n ia s n u L p a p n li d e d In b fo y rmation Authority 10 COOROW (S) 43 KONDININ (S)
4 LI 782-2015-3 44 KULIN (S)
7 8 11 DANDARAGAN (S)
45 WICKEPIN (S)
9 12 MOORA (S)
46 CUBALLING (S)
10 13 DALWALLINU (S)
13 47 WILLIAMS (S)
14
Legend 14 MOUNT MARSHALL (S) 48 NARROGIN (S)
11 12 20 17 15 YILGARN (S) 49 WEST ARTHUR (S)
21 Homestead Lot Policy Area
22 16 15 16 WESTONIA (S) 50 WAGIN (S)
23 24 26 27 28 19 18 Local Government Boundary 17 MUKINBUDIN (S) 51 DUMBLEYUNG (S)
25 33 18 NUNGARIN (S) 52 LAKE GRACE (S)
Indian 29 30 31 32 19 TRAYNING (S) 53 ESPERANCE (S)
Perth 37 36 35 34 20 KOORDA (S) 54 RAVENSTHORPE (S)
38 21 WONGAN-BALLIDU (S) 55 JERRAMUNGUP (S)
Ocean
39 41 42 43 22 VICTORIA PLAINS (S) 56 KENT (S)
40
46 45 44 23 GINGIN (S) 57 KATANNING (S)
47 48 24 CHITTERING (S) 58 WOODANILLING (S)
50 51 52 53 25 TOODYAY (S) 59 KOJONUP (S)
49 58 56 26 GOOMALLING (S) 60 BOYUP BROOK (S)
57 54 61 CRANBROOK (S)
60 59 27 DOWERIN (S)
62 63 55 Esperance 28 WYALKATCHEM (S) 62 BROOMEHILL-TAMBELLUP (S)
63 GNOWANGERUP (S)
61 29 NORTHAM (S)
64 PLANTAGENET (S)
64 30 CUNDERDIN (S)
65 65 ALBANY (S)
31 TAMMIN (S)
Albany 32 KELLERBERRIN (S)
33 MERREDIN (S)
Western Australian Planning Commission - December 2016

DC Policy
3.4
9
- Subdivision of rural land
Appendix 3
Additional information to support
subdivision applications
In accordance with Section 8 of this policy, applicants
(f) whether the subdivision would prejudice future
are encouraged to address the following matters,
urban expansion;
where relevant, in support of their application for
subdivision: (g) whether there are any significant noise sources
or other potential forms of nuisance to the
(a) a statement explaining the intent of the
proposed use;
subdivision and any relevant background
information; (h) whether a previous use has resulted in
contaminated soils or the use of construction and
(b) whether each lot has a sustainable water supply
demolition waste for filled areas;
for domestic, fire management and agricultural
purposes, including, if relevant, the need for and (i) whether there are any heritage features including
proximity to existing services and infrastructure, archaeology and any sites of Aboriginal
and details of the service provider; significance or claims on the land;
(c) whether subdivision boundaries have been (j) any potential adverse environmental impacts of
designed to reflect sound planning and land the proposed subdivision;
management principles;
(k) any potential adverse impacts on amenity and/or
(d) whether a proposal complies with the health, such as noise, dust and spray drift;
performance criteria and standards specified in
(l) whether the proposal is consistent with the
the relevant guidelines for bushfire protection,
provisions of a WAPC endorsed strategy or
including appropriate access and egress in case
scheme operating in the district; and
of emergency;
(m) the capability of the land to support the
(e) how the proposal relates to adjacent properties,
proposed land use.
reserves, roads and existing and proposed
adjoining land uses;
Western Australian Planning Commission - December 2016