State Planning Policy 4.2
Activity Centres
July 2023
Prepared under Part Three of the Planning and Development Act 2005
by the Western Australian Planning Commission

The Department of Planning, Lands and
Heritage acknowledges the traditional
click to follow
owners and custodians of this land. We pay
our respect to Elders past and present, their
1 CITATION 1 TABLES
descendants who are with us today, and those
who will follow in their footsteps.
Table 1:
2 POLICY INTENT 1 Major activity centre use
Disclaimer floorspace thresholds 11
This document has been produced by the 3 ACTIVITY CENTRES IN
APPENDICES
Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage WESTERN AUSTRALIA 1
on behalf of the Western Australian Planning
Appendix 1:
Commission. Any representation, statement,
opinion or advice expressed or implied in this 4 APPLICATION OF THIS Activity centre hierarchy –
publication is made in good faith and on the POLICY 1 roles and characteristics 13
basis that the Government, its employees and
agents are not liable for any damage or loss
whatsoever which may occur as a result of 5 POLICY OBJECTIVES 2
action taken or not taken, as the case may be,
in respect of any representation, statement,
opinion or advice referred to herein. 6 POLICY OUTCOMES 2
Professional advice should be obtained before
applying the information contained in this
document to particular circumstances. 7 POLICY MEASURES 3
7.1 Activity centre hierarchy –
roles and characteristics 3
© State of Western Australian
7.2 Needs assessment 3
Published by the
Western Australian Planning Commission 7.3 Requirement for precinct
Gordon Stephenson House structure plans and local
140 William Street development plans 4
Perth WA 6000
7.4 Land uses 5
Locked Bag 2506
7.5 Employment 6
Perth WA 6001
7.6 Urban form 7
Gazettal date: 03/07/2023
7.7 Movement and access 7
Publication date: 19/06/2023
Operational date: 03/07/2023 7.8 Net benefit test 8
website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au 7.9 Out-of-centre
email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au development 9
tel: 08 6551 8002
fax: 08 6551 9001 8. DEFINITIONS 10
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
This document is available in alternative
formats on application to the Department
of Planning, Lands and Heritage
Communications Branch.

State Planning Policy 4.2
1
Activity Centres
July 2023
1 CITATION 3 ACTIVITY CENTRES IN 4 APPLICATION OF THIS POLICY
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
This is a State planning policy made under Part 3 of the a) This policy and its Implementation Guidelines
Planning and Development Act 2005. This policy may be Activity centres are mixed use urban areas where there is apply to the preparation and assessment of
cited as State Planning Policy 4.2 Activity Centres (SPP 4.2). a concentration of commercial, residential and other land planning instruments and certain subdivision and
uses. They are multi-functional community focal points development applications that relate to activity
where people live, work, shop, meet and relax. They vary centres within the Metropolitan (Perth), Peel and
2 POLICY INTENT in size and function and are generally well-serviced by Greater Bunbury Region Scheme areas, including:
transport networks with a focus on public transport and
Planning instruments:
active transport. Activity centres may include land uses
To ensure planning, development and decision making
such as commercial, retail, food and hospitality, medium • regional, sub-regional, district and local
adequately consider the distribution, function, broad land
and high-density housing, entertainment, tourism, civic/ planning strategies and frameworks
use, access and urban form considerations for activity
community, higher education, and medical services. • local planning schemes, scheme reviews and
centres.
amendments
It is the Western Australian Planning Commission’s
• precinct structure plans for activity centres,
(WAPC) intention that all activity centres perform the
reviews of endorsed activity centre plans
role outlined above (relative to their level in the hierarchy
and any applicable specialisation) to provide for • standard structure plans where activity
sustainable development and to benefit their community centres are proposed
through efficient and equitable access to goods, services
• local development plans for activity centres
and employment.
Certain subdivision and development applications:
SPP 4.2 and precinct structure plans, in conjunction with
• subdivision within activity centres, other than
other related policies, provide for a land use planning
on land zoned Residential
framework that encourages and allows activity centres
• development applications for major
to develop appropriately. It is therefore imperative
developments within activity centres
to review the State and local planning frameworks
applicable to activity centres. • development of Category A activity centre
uses outside activity centres (out-of-centre
In addition to planning, each activity centre requires
development).
investment in infrastructure, often early on, to unlock
the centre’s development potential. Many existing b) The Greater Bunbury Region Scheme area includes
activity centres that propose upgrades or expansions the Bunbury Metropolitan Area (refer Bunbury-
will require improvements to the public realm and Geographe sub-regional strategy) and nearby
provision of community facilities. Ongoing place making, towns. The provisions of this policy only apply
management and monitoring are also essential to create to the activity centres within the Bunbury
sustainable activity centres, integrated within their Metropolitan Area and do not apply to the
community. surrounding towns.

State Planning Policy 4.2
2
Activity Centres
July 2023
c) The objectives, outcomes and measures of 5 POLICY OBJECTIVES 6 POLICY OUTCOMES
this policy may be applied outside of the
abovementioned region scheme areas, as The objectives of this policy are to: The following outcomes specify the role of planning and
applicable, to guide the preparation and development in contributing to the overall objectives of
a) Locate people and the employment, goods and
assessment of planning instruments at the this policy. The outcomes should be achieved through
services they need close to each other within
discretion of the WAPC (refer Implementation compliance with the policy measures. They are to
activity centres.
Guidelines section 3). Where this policy has been be used for the assessment of planning instruments,
applied to an endorsed planning instrument b) Promote activity centres as the focus of integrated subdivision applications and development applications
under this clause, subsequent subdivision and and well-designed medium and high-density and to guide discretion in decision-making.
development applications [those outlined in residential and mixed use development.
a) The activity centre network meets different levels
sub-clause (a)] are also subject to SPP 4.2.
c) Plan for the sustainable growth and development
of community need and enables employment,
d) This policy is to be read in conjunction with (but of activity centres ensuring development intensity housing, goods and services to be accessed
not limited to): is appropriate to a centre’s position in the activity efficiently and equitably by the community.
centre hierarchy.
• the SPP 4.2 Implementation Guidelines b) The primacy of activity centres is reinforced, and
d) Manage the hierarchy of activity centres to
• State Planning Policy 7.0 Design of the Built out-of-centre development does not undermine
ensure efficient and equitable access by the
Environment (SPP 7.0) the hierarchy of activity centres.
community to employment opportunities, housing
• Liveable Neighbourhoods [to be replaced by choice and a broad range of goods and services. c) New activity centres or the intensification of
State Planning Policy 7.1 Neighbourhood existing activity centres does not unreasonably
e) Ensure activity centres are accessible and well-
Design (SPP 7.1)] undermine existing centres.
served by a range of transport options with a
• State Planning Policy 7.2 Precinct Design priority on walking, cycling and public transport d) Sufficient development intensity and appropriate
(SPP 7.2) use. land use mix is provided, that supports the role and
• State Planning Policy 3.6 Infrastructure function of activity centres, promotes economic
f) Ensure the urban form of activity centres enables
Contributions (SPP 3.6) growth, provides employment opportunities and
the primary focus of activity to be on the street, in
enhances consumer choice.
• Local Planning Strategy Guidelines the public realm and connected to public open
• other relevant State Planning Policies, spaces. e) The density and diversity of housing in and around
activity centres is maximised to improve land
Operational Policies, Position Statements and
efficiency, housing choice and housing affordability,
Guidelines.
and assists with delivering the urban consolidation
objectives and outcomes of the strategic planning
framework for the applicable region.

State Planning Policy 4.2
3
Activity Centres
July 2023
f) Activity centres and development within them 7 POLICY MEASURES discretion of the WAPC through an appropriate
are well-designed, cohesive and functional, provide strategic planning process, in accordance with the
for the needs of their community and capitalise 7.1 Activity centre hierarchy – Implementation Guidelines (section 3).
on the sustainable use of existing and planned roles and characteristics
e) Decision-makers should ensure planning
infrastructure.
instrument approvals and subdivision and
a) Appendix 1 outlines the roles and characteristics
g) Activity centres have a compact urban form with development decisions support the established
of the various classification levels of the activity
pedestrian-dominant streetscapes and public realm and planned activity centre hierarchy. Decision-
centre hierarchy. Appendix 1 also shows a
based around a main street(s) and public open makers should not support planning instruments or
consolidated list of the established and planned
spaces. subdivision and development applications that are
hierarchy of capital city, specialised, strategic,
likely to:
h) Street design and the urban structure is conducive secondary and district activity centres, as
to and prioritises access to and within activity identified in regional, sub-regional and district- • undermine the established and planned
centres by walking, cycling and public transport. level strategies, frameworks and structure activity centre hierarchy;
plans. The established and planned hierarchy of
i) Private vehicle trips to and within activity centres • be inconsistent with the objectives and
neighbourhood and local centres are identified in
are minimised, reducing the demand for parking. outcomes of SPP 4.2;
the relevant local planning strategy.
j) Planning and development of activity centres • result in a deterioration in the level of service to
balances the environmental, social, health, b) The hierarchy is to be used when preparing and the local community;
determining planning instruments and subdivision
economic and cultural values of activity centres to • undermine public investment in infrastructure
and development applications to coordinate the
provide a net positive benefit to local communities. and services; or
location and distribution of activity centres within
an area, and the hierarchy classification, roles and • unreasonably affect the amenity of the locality
characteristics of individual activity centres (also through traffic or other impacts.
refer Implementation Guidelines sections 3 and 4).
7.2 Needs Assessment
c) Planning instruments and subdivision and
development applications should be consistent
a) A needs assessment provides an information
with the activity centre’s classification in the
base to support decision-making by including
hierarchy and the roles and characteristics of that
an assessment of projected land use needs of
classification (as outlined in Appendix 1).
communities in a local government area.
d) The activity centre hierarchy provides for certainty The needs assessment should consider and
and maintains level of service to the community assess the demand for all activity centre uses and
in accordance with the objectives of this policy. is to be prepared as part of a local planning strategy
In limited circumstances, new centres may be to guide future development.
identified, and existing centres reclassified, at the

State Planning Policy 4.2
4
Activity Centres
July 2023
b) Where a local planning strategy does not have a b) A precinct structure plan or a local development g) Precinct structure plans and local development
Needs Assessment, or the Needs Assessment has plan may be prepared for neighbourhood and plans may be prepared by the WAPC, the relevant
not been updated for more than five years, a new local activity centres, at the discretion of the local local government or by landowners. A consolidated
Needs Assessment may be prepared in support of a: government and the WAPC. This requirement (or precinct structure plan or local development
exemption) should be outlined in a local planning plan may be prepared that applies to a group of
• local planning scheme/scheme amendment
strategy and/or local planning scheme. activity centres where their walkable catchments
• precinct structure plan
overlap and where coordinated planning may
c) Precinct structure plans and local development
• standard structure plan at the district or local lead to greater efficiencies and improved planning
plans are to be prepared in accordance with the
level. outcomes. Each centre’s individual characteristics
requirements of SPP 7.2 Precinct Design, SPP 7.2
should be reflected in the plan.
Note: Needs Assessments should not be prepared for Precinct Design Guidelines and other relevant policies
development applications. In circumstances and guidelines.
7.3.1 Major development in the absence of an
where the relevant strategy or structure
d) Precinct structure plans and local development endorsed precinct structure plan or local
plan does not include a Needs Assessment,
development plan
plans (where required) should be endorsed by
development applications should be
the relevant decision-maker for that instrument
accompanied by a Net Benefit Test. a) While it is expected that precinct structure plans
prior to a major development being approved to
or local development plans are endorsed prior to
c) Once proposed floorspace and/or land ensure the development of the activity centre is
major development, in exceptional circumstances
requirements are identified, this information should integrated, cohesive and accessible.
a major development may be considered in
be shown spatially within the planning document
e) To ensure cumulative development within a centre the absence of an endorsed precinct structure
being prepared and include an indicative range of
is considered, where the major development plan or local development plan (where one is
activity centre use floorspace per activity centre.
threshold (see Table 1) is not initially triggered by required) subject to achieving all the objectives and
d) Guidance on the appropriate approach and a development, any subsequent development outcomes of this policy and:
methodology for a Needs Assessment is provided application for additional floorspace on the same
• the major development satisfying other
within the Implementation Guidelines (Appendix lot within five years of development approval will
relevant requirements of this policy, particularly
G1). be classified as major development if the combined
section 7.6 Urban Form, and the requirements
floorspace exceeds the relevant threshold.
of SPP 7.2 Precinct Design and SPP 7.2 Precinct
7.3 Requirement for precinct structure f) Where a local planning scheme amendment (or Design Guidelines; and
plans and local development plans new local planning scheme) proposes to rezone • demonstrating to the satisfaction of the
a) A precinct structure plan is to be prepared for land in a way that could accommodate major decision-maker that:
development, a precinct structure plan should
strategic, secondary, district and specialised activity – the proposal delivers an immediate and
be prepared and approved concurrently with the
centres unless the WAPC is satisfied that one is not demonstrated local need (as identified in
amendment (refer Implementation Guidelines
required (refer Implementation Guidelines section an endorsed local planning strategy, refer
section 3.3.2).
3.3.2.1). section 7.2) for the proposed floorspace
and land uses; or

State Planning Policy 4.2
5
Activity Centres
July 2023
– the proposal delivers significant net benefit cultural/tourist, recreation (public and private), f) Subdivision applications should ensure that the
to the community (as demonstrated by a community facilities, medium and high-density lot configuration, lot widths and lot depths are
Net Benefit Test, refer section 7.8), above residential land uses in activity centres, having appropriate for the types of activity centre uses
what is identified in current and emerging regard to the following: and dwellings that are planned for in the activity
plans. centre to avoid prejudicing the ultimate vision for
• the indicative land uses for the centre
the activity centre (refer Implementation Guidelines
b) An exceptional circumstances exemption should: (Appendix 1)
section 4.2).
• only be granted for proposals where the • employment requirements (refer section 7.5)
g) Decision-makers should consider the provisions in
proponent demonstrates that the development • whether the centre has a rail station or other
this policy, such as Appendix 1, that guide location
will proceed within the approval validity high frequency public transport
and appropriate floorspace sizes when considering
period (such as through funding arrangements
• the extent of land in common ownership discretionary land uses in local planning schemes
and/or engagement with future tenants and
construction partners); • the existing land use mix (D and A uses).
• not be granted more than once for the • the proposed scale of development
7.4.2 Housing
same activity centre, regardless of whether • the availability of quality public open space
any previous approvals were substantially a) Medium and high-density housing should be
• the extent to which the activity centre and its
commenced or not; and incorporated within activity centre cores and
catchment have already developed.
frame areas and the walkable catchment(s) of
• not be granted for planned activity centres
d) Land uses that generate activity outside normal activity centres to support the non-residential
(such as those in greenfield areas).
business hours (e.g. hospitality and entertainment, functions of the activity centre, provide
community facilities, gymnasiums) should be opportunities to live near services and employment,
7.4 Land uses located in activity centres to generate additional establish a sense of community and increase
evening and weekend activity and to take activity outside normal business hours. Average
7.4.1 Land use diversity
advantage of shared use of facilities such as car residential densities and preferred dwelling types
a) A diversity of land uses in activity centres is parking and public transport. are provided in Appendix 1. These are intended as
essential to their vitality and viability, and promotes a guide to inform precinct structure planning, local
e) Major developments should achieve a diversity
a more equitable distribution of services, activities planning strategies and local planning scheme
of land uses to provide for the community that
and employment for the community, including at reviews and amendments (refer Implementation
they serve, consistent with any land use mix
different times of the day. Guidelines section 3.3.6).
requirements outlined in the relevant precinct
b) It is expected that activity centres (neighbourhood structure plan and/or local planning strategy. b) Housing supply in specialised centres should
and above) develop in a manner that does not Where market factors may not support a diversity be assessed on a case-by-case basis, with the
result in a predominantly single purpose centre. of land uses in the near-term, the proposal exception of Perth and Jandakot Airports which
should demonstrate that it can easily adapt over should not have housing.
c) Planning instruments should provide for a wide
time to achieve a diversity of land uses (refer
range of office, commercial, retail, food and
Implementation Guidelines section 4.3).
hospitality, entertainment, education, leisure,

State Planning Policy 4.2
6
Activity Centres
July 2023
c) In accordance with SPP 7.2 Precinct Design c) When assessing development applications for 7.4.4 Offices
Guidelines and other relevant policies, precinct shops, decision-makers should consider the
a) As outlined in Appendix 1, larger offices (office
structure plans for activity centres should address following:
– large) should be located in the capital city and
the need generated by any increased population
• maximising efficient and equitable access to strategic centres. Secondary centres and district
for additional:
essential goods and services, particularly fresh centres with rail stations, and some specialised
• public open space and recreation facilities food, by the community centres are also suitable for larger offices.
• schools and other community facilities • the zoning in the local planning scheme b) Office development in other secondary,
• transport and servicing infrastructure • availability of land within existing or higher district centres and in neighbourhood centres
order activity centres should generally be smaller and of a scale that
• affordable housing.
complements the function of the centre
• urban design that facilitates the enhancement
It may be appropriate that a range of mechanisms (office – small).
of the public realm and supports a mix of retail
are used to address some of this provision including
scale and opportunity. c) Offices, unless ancillary to industrial developments,
development incentives (refer section 2.8 of SPP 7.2
should not be located on land zoned for industry
Precinct Design Guidelines) and/or development d) Bulky goods showrooms are to be considered and
under the region or local planning scheme.
contributions (refer SPP 3.6 Infrastructure planned at all levels of the planning framework to
Contributions). ensure that the opportunities for this land use are
facilitated, while the impacts of this land use on the 7.5 Employment
d) Planning and development in activity centres
activity centre network and policy objectives are
should meet the average residential density a) Activity centres are priority locations for
managed.
(outlined in Appendix 1) or demonstrate that it employment and employment-generating activities
can be met in the future (refer Implementation e) Bulky goods showrooms should be located in and should contribute towards the achievement of
Guidelines section 4.3). the activity centre frame due to their unique the relevant regional and sub-regional employment
requirements (refer to section 7.6 Urban Form). self-sufficiency objectives.
7.4.3 Shops and Bulky Goods Showrooms There are existing standalone precincts outside
b) Some activity centres are well suited to providing
the activity centre network, often adjacent to
a) The location, distribution and design of shops and opportunities for strategic employment, in
industrial areas, and this policy does not prevent
bulky goods showrooms should support the addition to population-driven employment, due
them from continuing. However, new standalone
established and planned activity centre hierarchy. to their characteristics such as access to
precincts of this nature outside the activity centre
Appendix 1 and the major development high-frequency public transport and freight
network should be considered for any potential to
thresholds (Table 1) provide guidance on where networks, proximity to strategic employment
undermine the activity centre hierarchy.
different types and sizes of shop (small and large) lands and existing industry agglomerations, and
and bulky goods showrooms should be located. high populations within their catchments.
b) Shops are important anchors of activity centres c) Planning instruments are to facilitate:
and should be located in activity centres wherever
• employment opportunities in activity centres
possible, particularly where those shops provide for
by maximising the density and range of
the daily and weekly needs of their community.
activities to improve access to a range of jobs

State Planning Policy 4.2
7
Activity Centres
July 2023
• where appropriate, strategic employment • pedestrian and cyclist prioritisation through enable permeability and legibility and to provide an
opportunities providing wider footpaths, streets designed activity centre structure than can accommodate
for lower vehicle speeds, and having carparks change over time.
• development that can be a catalyst for further
sleeved behind or integrated into buildings
economic development and employment f) The urban form of an existing activity centre
growth, both locally and for the State • street blocks that enable permeability and may need to change over time depending on
• education and training, health and other legibility for pedestrians (indicative range of the existing development pattern, particularly for
specialist facilities in higher-order activity 60-120 metres wide by 120-240 metres long), activity centres with an urban form dominated by
centres including mid-block pedestrian links a shopping centre and large areas of car parking.
• high-quality public realm and public open The existing form and function of an activity
• co-locating retail, commercial, entertainment
spaces incorporating plazas, malls, green centre should be investigated, and consideration
and other compatible uses with tertiary
spaces, green linkages and streetscapes/lanes given to how it may need to change to address the
education, health and other suitable uses in
accessible by residents, visitors and workers at key urban form elements of activity centres when
specialised activity centres.
all times of the day and night. preparing a precinct structure plan for an activity
d) Major development should meaningfully centre. This may include the provision of new
c) It is acceptable to adapt the key design elements
contribute towards achieving employment public open spaces to provide for the needs of new
to suit the smaller size of local and neighbourhood
objectives outlined in the relevant precinct residents and increased visitors to the centre.
centres, provided that the overall principle of a
structure plan and/or within an endorsed local
pedestrian-dominant compact urban form is not g) All precinct structure plans and local development
planning strategy.
compromised. plans for activity centres are to satisfy the
requirements of SPP 7.2 Precinct Design and
d) The activity centre frame and wider walkable
7.6 Urban form SPP 7.2 Precinct Design Guidelines. Development
catchment should relate to the core and be
applications should satisfy the urban form guidance
a) Activity centres are to be defined by a compact similarly pedestrian and cyclist focused with
contained within an endorsed precinct structure
urban form with pedestrian-dominant streetscapes appropriate amenities and weather protection
plan or local development plan.
where the primary focus of activity is on key public along key approaches to the centre core and public
streets and open spaces. Appendix 1 outlines the transport stations/stops. h) Subdivision applications should consider and
typical urban form for each of the activity centre support the future urban form of the activity
e) Where activity centres also include service
types. centre in accordance with the Implementation
commercial sub-precincts (for bulky goods
Guidelines (refer section 4.2).
b) Activity centre cores should incorporate the showrooms and other similar land uses), these
following key design elements: should be integrated with the centre and designed
7.7 Movement and access
• a main street (or main streets in larger centres), to ensure pedestrian safety whilst recognising that
with buildings built to the street edge, active good vehicle access is necessary for these land uses. a) The physical organisation of the activity centre
land uses at ground levels, frequent openings The preferred location for these sub-precincts is network and individual activity centres needs
to the street, variable frontage widths, facade as part of the frame, adjacent the activity centre to support, and be supported by, a balanced
articulation and weather protection for core, with access to regional road and public access and movement network that makes it safe,
pedestrians (colonnades/awnings and/or street transport networks. Street blocks should be sized to
trees)

State Planning Policy 4.2
8
Activity Centres
July 2023
convenient and practical for residents, employees c) For strategic, specialised and secondary activity public transport, cycling infrastructure and paths)
and visitors to maximise travel by walking, cycling centres the precinct structure plan is to include: in proportion to the number of trips generated
and public transport both within and between by the proposal and in accordance with SPP 3.6
• mode share targets to promote a shift away
activity centres, while minimising the need to travel Infrastructure Contributions.
from private vehicle use to the maximum
by private car. The planning for activity centres
extent possible based on the current and
should seek to:
planned capacity of the movement network 7.8 Net Benefit Test
• ensure infrastructure investment and space and access needs of the activity centre
a) Major development proposals within activity
allocation for private car use does not
• a parking cap to constrain private vehicle trip
centres and out-of-centre developments can
compromise the achievement of activity centre
generation and promote mode shift
have an adverse effect on the extent and adequacy
land use and urban form objectives
• a parking plan outlining how public parking of facilities and services available to a local
• reduce private vehicle dependence, particularly
will be supplied and managed across the whole community, and the ability to access them in an
for commuter trips, and manage the impacts of
activity centre to prioritise use and availability efficient and equitable manner by walking, cycling
vehicle movements and parking
between different user groups. and public transport.
• enable a range of transport choices that meet
The WAPC’s Guidelines for Integrated Transport b) It is therefore important to ensure that
the access needs of residents, employees and
Plans and the Department of Transport’s Transport development of activity centre uses within an
visitors, including universal access
Planning Guidelines relevant to activity centres area generally complies with the floorspace need
• promote a balanced movement network that and large shopping centres should be used when identified for specific activity centres in local
prioritises walking, cycling, public transport, preparing the above. planning strategies or structure plans (a Needs
and shared mobility Assessment, refer section 7.2) and where a proposal
d) The requirements in sub-clause (c) may be
exceeds that floorspace need, the proposal is to
• provide for safe and efficient freight and extended to district centres that have a rail station
demonstrate a net benefit to the community of any
delivery access to the activity centre. at the discretion of the WAPC. This requirement
impacted centres.
b) Precinct structure plans for activity centres are may be identified during preparation of the relevant
to satisfy relevant requirements of SPP 7.2 Precinct local planning strategy or at a later stage. c) The purpose of the Net Benefit (NB) Test is to
ensure that development applications and planning
Design Guidelines (Design Element 4: Movement), e) Development applications for major development
instruments align with the objectives of this policy.
including the identification of upgrades to transport are to include travel plans and parking supply
infrastructure to support the expected activity and management plans (prepared in accordance d) A net benefit occurs when the benefits (pros) to the
centre uses and residential growth of the activity with Department of Transport’s Transport Planning community arising from a proposal out weigh any
centre. The provisions of SPP 3.6 Infrastructure Guidelines) that support the mode share target identified impacts (cons) to the community arising
Contributions should be considered as part of this identified in the precinct structure plan. from a proposal.
process. The responsible authority may impose reasonable
e) Unless exempt, a NB Test is required for:
conditions on development approvals relating
• development applications for major
to contributions (financial or works) towards
development
upgrades to transport infrastructure (such as roads,

State Planning Policy 4.2
9
Activity Centres
July 2023
• development applications for out-of-centre 7.9 Out-of-centre development f) Out-of-centre developments are to be assessed in
development line with this policy, including the requirement for a
a) There is a general presumption against the approval
NB Test (refer section 7.8).
• planning instruments that identify new land or of activity centre uses outside of activity centres
rezone land to facilitate major development as they are likely to impact nearby activity centres g) Out-of-centre development may only be
or out-of-centre development and the overall activity centre hierarchy. appropriate where it is:
f) Where an endorsed local planning strategy or b) Out-of-centre development is: • sufficiently separated from nearby activity
structure plan includes an indicative amount of centres to minimise negative impacts to those
• any development application that proposes
activity centre use floorspace for the activity activity centres (as demonstrated through the
floorspace greater than 500m2 NLA for
centre derived from a Needs Assessment, a NB Test);
Category A activity centre uses located
NB Test is only required where this indicative
outside the boundary (refer Implementation • in proximity to existing housing at an average
activity centre use floorspace is proposed to be
Guidelines section 3.3.4) of an activity centre, dwelling density of at least 25 dwellings per
exceeded.
unless exempt [refer sub-clauses (c) and (d)]; gross Urban Zone (Region Schemes) hectare
g) Perth Capital City and strategic centres are exempt and/or within a 400m walkable catchment of the
from the requirement for a NB Test. development; and
• any new planning instrument or amendment
h) The NB Test is to demonstrate that the proposal to a planning instrument that will result in • accessible to its catchment community by
will: new land being capable of accommodating walking and cycling, minimising the need for
Category A or B activity centre uses outside additional private vehicle trips.
• not have an unreasonable and detrimental
of activity centres (regardless of land size).
impact on the activity centre hierarchy or the
existing or planned functions of activity centres c) Development applications for Category B activity
centre uses are not considered to be out-of-
• not have an unreasonable and detrimental
centre developments where the existing zoning
impact upon existing, committed and planned
contemplates (P, D, A) those land uses. They are not
public and private investment in activity
required to be assessed against this policy.
centres
d) Development applications for Category A activity
• deliver net benefit to the community and not
centre uses up to 1500m2 NLA are not considered
reduce the level of access to services by the
to be out-of-centre developments where they
community.
are located substantially within the 400m walkable
i) A NB Test is to be prepared by the proponent
catchment of a rail station. Assessment against this
in accordance with the methodology provided
section of the policy is not required.
within the Implementation Guidelines (section 5)
e) For development within the Greater Bunbury
and is to be submitted with the relevant planning
Region Scheme, out-of-centre development
instrument or development application.
provisions are only applicable within the Bunbury
Metropolitan Area.

State Planning Policy 4.2
10
Activity Centres
July 2023
8 DEFINITIONS
Category A uses Category B uses
Activity centre
Planning Land Use Triggers various policy requirements Only triggers policy requirements when
Categories* when exceeding the major development preparing new or amendments to
An activity centre shown in an endorsed regional,
threshold planning instruments
sub-regional, district-level or local-level strategy,
framework or structure plan. Capital City, Strategic, Shop/Retail Shop Convenience store
Specialised, Secondary and District activity centres (PLUC: 5-SHP)
Liquor store – large Liquor store – small
endorsed at the date of gazettal are shown in Appendix 1
Fast food outlet / lunch bar Market
for reference.
Restaurant/café Restricted premises
Activity centre core Service station
The main focus(es) of activity within the activity centre. Other Retail Bulky goods showroom
Cores contain any central points from which walkable (PLUC: 6-RET)
Motor vehicle, boat or caravan sales
catchments are measured (refer walkable catchment
definition). Office / Business Medical centre
(PLUC: 7-OFF)
Office
Activity centre frame
Entertainment / Amusement parlour
The secondary focus of activity within the activity centre,
Recreation / Cultural
Art gallery
adjacent to the core. Walkable catchments are not
(PLUC: 9-ENT)
measured from the frame area. Smaller centres may not Cinema / theatre
have a frame. Hotel
Motel
Activity centre hierarchy / network, hierarchy
Nightclub
All activity centres, existing and planned, within the Reception centre
Metropolitan and Peel Region Scheme areas and the Recreation – private
Bunbury Metropolitan Area, arranged into the seven Small bar
classification levels being capital city, strategic, specialised,
Tavern
secondary, district, neighbourhood and local activity
centres. Service Industry Motor vehicle repair
(PLUC: 4-SER)
Motor vehicle wash
Activity centre use(s), category A and B
* From the WAPC’s Land Use and Employment Survey.
Includes the following land uses as defined in Schedule 1
Note 1: Other land uses in local planning schemes may be suitable in activity centres (for example consulting rooms, trade
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
supplies) but are not subject to this policy as they may also be suitable outside activity centres.
Regulations 2015, split into Categories A and B:
Note 2: Where a land use in a local planning scheme reasonably aligns with the above land uses (for example personal care
services which aligns with shop), decision-makers should consider whether this policy should apply to that land use.

State Planning Policy 4.2
11
Activity Centres
July 2023
Bulky goods showroom
Table 1: Major activity centre use floorspace thresholds
As defined in the Planning and Development (Local
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. Established Activity Centre Planned Activity Centre
Activity Centre Hierarchy
(m2 NLA) (m2 NLA)
Bunbury Metropolitan Area
Strategic 10000 0 – any development in
As shown in the Bunbury-Geographe Sub-Regional Strategy. a planned centre is major
Specialised 3000 development
Established activity centre
Secondary 10000
There are existing activity centre uses (or use) within the
activity centre. District 5000
Existing or proposed train station Neighbourhood 3000
An existing train station or a proposed train station
Local 1500
identified in a sub-regional planning framework, within a
400m walkable catchment of the activity centre.
High frequency public transport
Needs Assessment Planned activity centre
A public transport route, or multiple routes serving the
same station/stop that if combined have timed stops As outlined in section 7.2 Needs Assessments, an There are no existing activity centre uses (or use)
every 15 minutes during weekday peak periods (7am to information base to support decision-making by occurring within the activity centre.
9am and 5pm to 7pm). including an assessment of projected land use needs of
communities in a local government area, that considers Office
Major development and assesses the demand for all activity centre uses.
As defined in the Planning and Development (Local
A development application is considered a major Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. SPP 4.2 provides for
Net Benefit Test
development if the net additional floorspace for two different sizes:
Category A activity centre use (or uses) is greater A test prepared in accordance with section 7.8 Net Benefit • Office – small – no greater than 1500m2 NLA
than the thresholds in Table 1. Note, this includes a Test.
• Office – large – greater than 1500m2 NLA
development application for change of use from a
Net lettable area (NLA)
Category B use to a Category A use.
As defined in the Planning and Development (Local
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015.

State Planning Policy 4.2
12
Activity Centres
July 2023
Out-of-centre development square or main street, rail or bus station and/or important
services such as a supermarket. Depending on the centre
As outlined in section 7.9 Out-of-Centre Development,
type (Appendix 1), the extent of the walkable catchment
out-of-centre development is:
is either 200m, 400m, 800m or 1200m with the inner
• any development application that proposes 200m comprising the centre core.
floorspace greater than 500m2 NLA for Category A
activity centre uses located outside the boundary of
an activity centre, unless exempt
• any new planning instrument or amendment to a
planning instrument that will result in new land being
capable of accommodating Category A or B activity
centre uses outside of activity centres (regardless of
land size).
Shop
As defined in the Planning and Development (Local
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. SPP 4.2 provides for
two different sizes:
• shop – small – no greater than 1500m2 NLA
• shop – large – greater than 1500m2 NLA.
Strategic employment
Is associated with the production and transfer of goods,
services and knowledge predominantly to serve markets
beyond the immediate location or catchment. Also
known as trade clusters, as distinct from local clusters,
which comprise industries that serve local population and
business driven demand.
Walkable catchment
Derived from application of the ped-shed technique
to the existing or proposed street/footpath network
measured from an agreed upon central point(s) within the
activity centre core. The central point(s) may be a town

State Planning Policy 4.2
13
Activity Centres
July 2023
APPENDIX 1: ACTIVITY CENTRE HIERARCHY – ROLES AND CHARACTERISTICS
CAPITAL CITY
Activity centres Roles and characteristics
Metropolitan (Perth) and Main role and typical attributes
Peel Region Scheme
Perth Capital City (including Northbridge, East Perth and West Perth) is the largest of the activity centres, providing the most intensely concentrated
Perth
development in the Perth, Peel and Bunbury regions. It has the greatest range of high order services and jobs, and the largest commercial
Northbridge component of any activity centre. It is generally comprised of the highest density residential and commercial buildings, has excellent multi-modal
East Perth public transport connections and is the centre for cultural and entertainment facilities.
West Perth
Future indicative service population (trade) area
Western Australia
Typical transport connectivity and accessibility
Focus of regional transport networks, including passenger rail and major bus routes.
Desired land uses
All land uses with a good distribution to ensure walkable access to daily and weekly goods and services for residents, visitors and workers. Local and
neighbourhood centre land uses should be scattered throughout the capital city centre to ensure walkable access to daily and weekly goods and
services for residents, visitors and workers.
Typical urban form
High density urban area characterised by high-rise office towers and podium and tower residential developments that support highly activated and
pedestrianised streets and public spaces. New development should contribute to an attractive, dynamic and liveable city environment.
Average residential density (dwellings per gross Central City Area Zone hectare within the walkable catchment)
75+
Preferred residential dwelling types
Medium to high-rise apartments / multiple dwellings

State Planning Policy 4.2
14
Activity Centres
July 2023
STRATEGIC CENTRES
Activity centres Roles and characteristics
Metropolitan (Perth) and Main role and typical attributes
Peel Region Scheme
Strategic centres are the main regional and sub-regional activity centres. They are multi-purpose centres that provide a diversity of uses and are
ArmadaleT
the main focus for housing and employment growth outside the Capital City. These centres provide the full range of economic and community
CanningtonT services necessary for the communities in their catchments and wider region. These centres are expected to service substantial populations,
FremantleT providing health, community and social services, be well-served by public transport and provide opportunities for business agglomeration.
JoondalupT
Future indicative service population (trade) area
MandurahT
MidlandT 300,000 – 400,000 persons
Morley
Typical transport connectivity and accessibility
RockinghamT
StirlingT Important focus for passenger rail and high frequency bus network with routes to multiple destinations.
Yanchep CityT
Desired land uses
Greater Bunbury
The centre core or cores should contain district centre land uses and office – large. Local and neighbourhood centre land uses should be scattered
Region Scheme
throughout the strategic centre to ensure walkable access to daily and weekly goods and services for residents, visitors and workers.
Bunbury CBD
Typical urban form
High density urban area within the centre core(s) characterised by mid and high-rise office towers and podium and tower residential developments
that support highly activated and pedestrianised street frontages and public spaces.
Mid-rise buildings and contiguous, pedestrian friendly street frontages and public spaces outside the centre core(s) that include some activation.
New development should contribute to an attractive, dynamic and liveable environment with a coherent street frontage that has a pedestrian scale.
Average residential density (dwellings per gross Central City Area/Regional Centre Zone hectare within the walkable catchment)
30+ (800m)
50+ (800-1200m) where there is an existing or proposed train station within 400m of the centre
Preferred residential dwelling types
Medium to high-rise apartments / multiple dwellings
T Indicates a centre with a train station

State Planning Policy 4.2
15
Activity Centres
July 2023
SPECIALISED CENTRES AND NODES
Activity centres Roles and characteristics
Metropolitan (Perth) and Main role and typical attributes
Peel Region Scheme
Specialised centres focus on regionally significant economic and institutional activities, such as logistics-based businesses for airports or knowledge-
Education, research and
based for health and tertiary education precincts. Planning for these centres should aim to protect the specialisation while improving the growth
health specialisation:
and clustering of business activity of State and regional significance, particularly in knowledge-based or logistics-based industries. These areas are
UWA/QE2 to be developed as places with a concentration of linked businesses and institutions providing a major contribution to the economy, with excellent
transport links and potential to accommodate significant future growth in jobs and in some instances housing. Specialised nodes are smaller in
Karnup (East)
scale than specialised centres.
Murdoch
Future indicative service population (trade) area
Education, research and
n/a
technology specialisation:
Bentley/Curtin
Typical transport connectivity and accessibility
Aviation and logistics Important focus for passenger rail and/or high frequency bus network.
specialisation:
Desired land uses
Perth Airport*
Jandakot Airport* n/a
Typical urban form
Greater Bunbury
Region Scheme
n/a
Education, research and
health specialisation: Average residential density (dwellings per gross hectare within the walkable catchment)
Bunbury Health and Education
n/a
Precinct (College Grove)
Preferred residential dwelling types
n/a
* Under s112 of the Airports Act 1996 (Commonwealth), Perth and Jandakot Airports are not subject to the Western Australian planning framework, including SPP 4.2. Instead, Part 5
of the Airports Act 1996 (Commonwealth) regulates land use planning through requiring the preparation of Airport master plans and Major development plans. These plans must
consider their impacts on, among other things, “the local and regional economy and community, including… commercial and retail development in the adjacent area” and must
address and justify any inconsistencies with adjoining planning schemes

State Planning Policy 4.2
16
Activity Centres
July 2023
SECONDARY CENTRES
Activity centres Roles and characteristics
Metropolitan (Perth) and Main role and typical attributes
Peel Region Scheme
Secondary centres share some characteristics with strategic centres but serve smaller catchments and offer a more limited range of services, facilities
Alkimos T
and employment opportunities. They perform an important role in the regional economy and provide essential services to their catchments.
Belmont Secondary centres with a rail station should be a focus for medium and high-density housing, employment growth and diversity of land uses.
Booragoon
Future indicative service population (trade) area
Claremont T
Clarkson Up to 150,000 persons
Cockburn T
Typical transport connectivity and accessibility
Ellenbrook T
Karrinyup Important focus for passenger rail and/or high frequency bus network with routes to multiple destinations.
Kwinana
Desired land uses
Leederville T
Maddington T All local, neighbourhood and district centre land uses.
Mirrabooka Secondary centres with access to a rail station may be suitable for office – large.
Pinjarra
Typical urban form
Subiaco T
Two Rocks North Medium and high-density urban area within the centre core characterised by mid to high-rise buildings that provide contiguous, activated and
Victoria Park pedestrian-friendly street frontages and public spaces.
Wanneroo Outside the core, low to mid-rise buildings achieve a pedestrian scale at the street frontage and streetscapes retain an attractive landscaped
character through street planting and landscaping of the private realm.
Warwick
Whitfords (Hillarys) New development should create an attractive and coherent street frontage that reflects the prevailing or planned pattern of street setbacks.
Average residential density (dwellings per gross Urban Zone hectare within the walkable catchment)
Greater Bunbury
Region Scheme
25+ (400m)
Wanju (Waterloo)
40+ (800-1200m) where there is an existing or proposed train station within 400m of the centre
Preferred residential dwelling types
Medium to high-rise apartments / multiple dwellings
Town houses / Grouped dwellings – 2+ storeys
T Indicates a centre with a train station

State Planning Policy 4.2
17
Activity Centres
July 2023
DISTRICT CENTRES
Activity centres
Metropolitan (Perth) and Greater Bunbury
Peel Region Scheme Region Scheme
Central Sub-Region Northlands (Balcatta) North-West Sub-Region South Metropolitan Peel Bunbury Forum (East Bunbury)
Ashfield T Oats Street (Carlisle) T Alexander Heights Sub-Region Dalyellup
Bassendean T Petra Street Banksia Grove Baldivis Eaton Fair (Eaton)
Bayswater T Riseley Street (Ardross) Butler T Byford T Parks Centre (Carey Park)
Bentley Riverton/Parkwood Currambine Cockburn Coast (North Coogee) Treendale
Bull Creek Scarborough Eglinton T Falcon
Burswood Peninsula T Southlands (Willetton) Girrawheen Forrest Lakes (Thornlie)
Canning Bridge T South Perth Gnangara T Gosnells T
Cottesloe T Stirling Central (Westminster) Greenwood Halls Head
Dianella Wembley/Jolimont Madeley Harrisdale
Dog Swamp (Yokine) West Leederville T Sorrento Karnup
East Victoria Park Two Rocks (Town Centre) Kelmscott T
Fitzgerald Street (North Perth) Woodvale Lakelands
Floreat Yanchep Central Mundijong (Whitby)
Glendalough T Yanchep Centre E Phoenix (Spearwood)
Inglewood Yanchep Centre F Ravenswood (Riverfront)
Kardinya Secret Harbour
Livingston (Canning Vale) North-East Sub-Region Southern River
Main Street (Osborne Park) Brabham T Thornlie
Maylands T Kingsford (Bullsbrook) Wandi
Melville Forrestfield Warnbro
Mount Hawthorn High Wycombe (Station) T Waroona
Mount Lawley/Highgate Kalamunda Wungong (Hilbert)
Mundaring
Noranda
North Fremantle T
T Indicates a centre with a train station

State Planning Policy 4.2
18
Activity Centres
July 2023
Roles and characteristics
Main role and typical attributes
District centres have a greater focus on servicing the daily and weekly needs of residents. Their relatively smaller scale and catchment enables them to have a greater local community focus
and provide services, facilities and job opportunities that reflect the needs of their catchments. Many district centres also have a specialisation such as tourism or entertainment which serves a
wider catchment. District centres with a rail station should be a focus for medium and high-density housing and employment growth.
Future indicative service population (trade) area
20,000 – 50,000 persons
Typical transport connectivity and accessibility
Focal point for rail and/or bus network, ideally with high frequency bus links.
Desired land uses
All local and neighbourhood centres land uses plus district centre land uses:
Bulky goods showroom, nightclub, cinema/theatre, hotel, motel.
District centres with access to a rail station may be suitable for office – large.
Typical urban form
Characterised by mid-rise buildings and contiguous, pedestrian friendly street frontages and public spaces that include some activation.
New development should create an attractive and coherent street frontage that has a pedestrian scale and provides passive surveillance of the street.
Average residential density (dwellings per gross Urban Zone hectare within the walkable catchment)
25+ (400m)
35+ (800-1200m) where there is an existing or proposed train station within 400m of the centre
Preferred residential dwelling types
Medium rise apartments / multiple dwellings
Town houses / grouped dwellings – 2+ storeys

State Planning Policy 4.2
19
Activity Centres
July 2023
NEIGHBOURHOOD CENTRES
Activity centres Roles and characteristics
Refer Local Planning Strategy Main role and typical attributes
Neighbourhood centres are important local focal points that provide for daily to weekly household shopping needs, community facilities and a
small range of other convenience services. They are also a focus for medium density housing. These centres play an important role in providing
walkable access to services and facilities for local communities.
Future indicative service population (trade) area
2,000 – 15,000 persons
Typical transport connectivity and accessibility
Stopping / transfer point for bus network
Desired land uses
All local centre land uses plus neighbourhood centre land uses:
Shop – large, liquor store – large, market, restricted premises, amusement parlour, educational establishment, recreation – private, small bar, tavern,
office – small, medical centre, art gallery.
Typical urban form
A compact and cohesive urban form that complements the surrounding built form character in scale and style.
New development should contribute to the public realm by enhancing and activating the streetscape and contributing to creating a distinct and
appealing character for the centre.
Average residential density (dwellings per gross Urban Zone hectare within the walkable catchment)
25+ (200m)
30+ (800m) where there is an existing or proposed train station within 400m of the centre
Preferred residential dwelling types
Low to medium-rise apartments/multiple dwellings
Townhouses / grouped dwellings

State Planning Policy 4.2
20
Activity Centres
July 2023
LOCAL CENTRES
Activity centres Roles and characteristics
Refer Local Planning Strategy Main role and typical attributes
Local centres provide for the convenience and incidental needs of local communities. These centres provide an important role in providing
walkable access to services and facilities for local communities.
Future indicative service population (trade) area
n/a
Typical transport connectivity and accessibility
n/a
Desired land uses
Local centre land uses:
Convenience store, shop – small, liquor store – small, fast food outlet / lunch bar, restaurant/café, small bar.
Typical urban form
Streetscapes have a landscaped character and built form patterns are defined by overall scale of the streetscape rather than individual building
height or style.
New development should respond to the existing or planned scale of the area. Development should include on-site landscaping to enhance the
public realm and provide amenity for residents and neighbours.
Average residential density (dwellings per gross Urban Zone hectare within the walkable catchment)
25+ (200m)
Preferred residential dwelling types*
Low-rise apartments / multiple dwellings
Townhouses / grouped dwellings
Single houses – Terrace
* Where local centres are located within industrial areas (either zoned Industrial under the region scheme or surrounded by Industry zone
or similar, there is no requirement to provide residential land uses within the walkable catchment.