Development Proposals before the State
Administrative Tribunal Local Planning Policy
Responsible directorate: Planning and Community Development
Objective: To ensure that planning decisions that are brought before the State Administrative
Tribunal and involve the City of Joondalup, are dealt with in an open and accountable
manner.
1. Authority:
This policy has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2 of the deemed provisions
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 which allows the
local government to prepare local planning policies relating to planning and development within
the Scheme Area.
2. Application:
This policy applies to a planning decision that is subject to review by the State Administrative
Tribunal.
3. Statement:
In accordance with the State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004 and the Planning and
Development Act 2005, an applicant aggrieved by a planning decision may seek a review of this
decision by the State Administrative Tribunal.
This policy outlines the high-level processes under which planning decisions before the State
Administrative Tribunal will be dealt with by the City.
4. Details:
4.1. Engagement of professional services:
a. External professional services will be engaged to represent the City in State
Administrative Tribunal proceedings where a Council decision is significantly
different to the Administration’s recommendation, including a reversal of that
recommendation.
Development Proposals Before the State Administrative Tribunal 1

b. External professional services may also be engaged for complex or controversial
matters, and/or where independent assistance would be considered beneficial to the
process.
4.2. Notification and involvement of Elected Members:
Elected Members shall be notified of matters before the State Administrative Tribunal and
the status of these matters.
4.3. Notification and involvement of community members:
a. The City will advise all parties who made a submission on an application that is the
subject of a review as soon as practical of the City receiving such notification. The
advice provided to parties shall contain information regarding the reviewable
decision and relevant information on the State Administrative Tribunal process.
b. Where a proposal is amended and the decision maker is invited to reconsider its
decision, the City will seek sufficient time to allow community consultation on the
amended proposal where consultation was undertaken by the City as part of the
original decision. Consultation will be in accordance with the Planning Consultation
Local Planning Policy.
c. Submissions received during the assessment process will form part of the City’s
evidence to the State Administrative Tribunal.
d. Where a community member makes a submission to the State Administrative
Tribunal or applies to intervene in a review, the City will not oppose community
members participating in the process.
4.4. Matters before the State Administrative Tribunal where the City or Council were not
the decision-maker:
Where the City or Council was not the decision-maker but is invited to participate in the
State Administrative Tribunal process, the City will have regard to this policy.
Creation date: October 2005 (CJ206-10/05)
Formerly: State Administrative Tribunal — Mediation and Revised Development
Proposals Policy
Amendments: CJ093-05/12, CJ163-08/12, CJ254-11/12, CJ027-02/18, CJ044-03/23
Last reviewed: March 2023 (CJ044-03/23)
Related documentation: • Planning and Development Act 2005
• State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
File reference: 101281
Development Proposals Before the State Administrative Tribunal 2