Short-Term Rental Accommodation
This document outlines the assessment criteria (locational and operational) for short-term rental
accommodation in the City of Melville. Please note that the policy does not apply to some types of
short-term rental accommodation such as hosted accommodation (refer to Policy Scope section).
If you are searching for general information in relation to planning requirements, please refer to the
Planning Services page of our website https://www.melvillecity.com.au or alternatively you can speak
to one of our planning officers either on the phone, 9364 0666 or in person at 10 Almondbury Road,
Booragoon during business hours, 8.30am – 5:00pm Monday to Friday.
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP 1.21
Policy Owner: Director Planning Last Review Date: 19 August 2025
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development (Local
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (Regulations) and the City of Melville Local Planning Scheme
No. 6 (LPS No.6). This Local Planning Policy may be cited as Local Planning Policy No. 1.21 – Short
Term Rental Accommodation (LPP1.21).
Policy Objectives
The objectives of this policy are as follows:
• To establish a clear framework for the identification, assessment, and determination of
applications for short term rental accommodation.
• To ensure that short-term rental accommodation is appropriately located and managed
so as to protect the amenity of residential areas or nearby residents.
Policy Scope
This policy applies to all short-term rental accommodation land uses which are not exempt from
requiring development approval throughout the City including Activity Centres that do not reference
Short Term Rental Accommodation as a use.
Through the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Amendment (Short-Term Rental
Accommodation) Regulations 2024, the State Government introduced a suite of planning reforms
which updated the approvals process for a variety of Short-Term rental accommodation land use
activities. In accordance with these amendments, development approval is not required for hosted
short-term rental accommodation, nor is development approval required for unhosted short-term
rental accommodation where the dwelling meets the following criteria:
i) Wholly or partly in the metropolitan region; and
ii) Registered under the Short-Term Rental Accommodation Act 2024 Part 3; and
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 25/08/2025 2:00 PM Page 1 of 6
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

iii) Used as unhosted short-term rental accommodation for no more than 90 nights in a
relevant 12-month period; and
iv) Not located in a zone in relation to which the use of a dwelling as unhosted short-term
rental accommodation is a class ‘X’ use or a use that is not consistent with the objectives
of that zone.
The requirement to register short-term rental accommodation activities has been created by the
State Government (the Department of Energy, Mines, Industry Regulation and Safety). Where a
Short-Term Rental Accommodation use is not exempt under the Regulations, development approval
from the Local Government is required, with this policy setting out the City’s process and the matters
taken into account in the assessment and determination of a development application.
Definitions / Abbreviations Used in Policy
LPS6 City of Melville Local Planning Scheme No. 6
Regulations Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
.
R-Codes Residential Design Codes Volume 1 and Residential Design Codes Volume 2 -
Apartments
Regulations Definitions
- Amenity
- Short-Term Rental Accommodation
- Short-Term Rental Arrangement
LPS6 Definitions
- Hotel
- Hosted Accommodation
- Un-hosted Accommodation
- Tourist and Visitor Accommodation
R-Code Definitions
- Ancillary Dwelling
- Dwelling
- Grouped Dwelling
- Multiple Dwelling
- Residential Building
- Single House
- Small Dwelling
Policy Statement
1 General
Assessment of development applications for short term rental accommodation uses
are to have regard to the objectives, performance criteria and standards identified in
this policy. Assessment will note that the range of different types and characteristics
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 25/08/2025 2:00 PM Page 2 of 6
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

of short-term rental accommodation uses is likely to vary the level of potential impact
related to the use. Where an accumulation of short-term rental accommodation uses
in a particular locality, site or building are likely to generate potential for additional
adverse amenity impacts, the use may not be supported by the City.
2 Site Characteristics
2.1 Residential zone (including Residential Areas designated in Activity Centre Plans)
The City’s policy position is that short-term rental accommodation uses are generally
not supported in most Residential areas however, some locations and dwelling types
will be better suited to short term rental accommodation in terms of being compatible
and complementary. Where a Short-Term Rental Accommodation use is proposed
within the Residential zone (and it requires development approval), the proposal will
need to meet the preferred property characteristics and have the preferred
operational characteristics. However, if proposals have any of the undesirable
property characteristics, regardless of having preferrable property and operational
characteristics, the proposal will generally not be supported.
Preferred Property Characteristics
(a) Location within 200 metres of mixed use zones and activity centres or within
400m of a hospital or tertiary education institution;
(b) Well served by footpaths, dual access paths and high-frequency public
transport;
(c) Located on Local Distributor or District Distributor Roads; and
(d) The immediate location (as per (a) above) is undersupplied by STRA.
Undesirable Property Characteristics
(a) Properties located within cul-de-sacs;
(b) Properties located on battle-axe style rear lots; or
(c) Properties comprising grouped or multiple dwelling developments with shared
access arrangements without the permission/consent of other strata owners.
Preferred Operational Characteristics
(a) Minimum stay of two nights;
(b) No more than six guests; and
(c) Identified management/contact person in operational management plan being
resident within same suburb as the STRA.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 25/08/2025 2:00 PM Page 3 of 6
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

2.2 Other zones
Mixed use zones and the non-residential zones of activity centres are preferred for
short term rental accommodation uses. These locations are likely to have less impact
on residential amenity and provide good access to services such as shopping centres,
workplaces, and public transport.
3 Car Parking
3.1 On-site parking is to be provided in accordance with the relevant standards of the
Residential Design Codes, applicable Local Planning Policy or Activity Centre Plan,
or other applicable legislation including parking for people with disabilities. Required
parking is to be provided, maintained and available on site with users of the short-
term rental accommodation not reliant on verge or street parking. The requirement to
use on-site parking is to be required as a part of the terms of an approved operational
management plan.
3.2 Car parking provided for the short-term rental accommodation use is to be within area
of exclusive use of the unit if within a strata development.
4 Signage
4.1 In Residential Zones, no on-site signage is permitted in association with the short-
term rental accommodation use. A discrete sign less than A4 sign may be permitted
near the entry of the dwelling however for strata properties, this signage must be
approved by the strata body/other owners.
4.2 Signage in other zones may be permitted based on the scale of the short-term rental
accommodation, however there is generally presumption against signage unless
necessary to direct persons to the correct dwelling/unit. The signage is to comply with
the objectives of the City’s relevant Local Planning Policy.
5 Operational Management Plan
5.1 An operational management plan is generally required to be submitted at the time of
lodging a development application for short-term rental accommodation use.
5.2 The management plan is to include, but not be limited to the following matters:
i. a code of conduct detailing the expected behaviour and obligations of guests.
The code of conduct shall be displayed in a prominent position within the
premises.
ii. management of complaints, in the form of a Complaints Management
Procedure (which must include the provision of the short-term rental
accommodation owners/managing agents contact telephone number for
adjoining neighbours);
iii. control of anti-social behaviour and the potential conflict between guests and
permanent residents of the area, detailing the expected behaviour of guests
and control of noise;
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 25/08/2025 2:00 PM Page 4 of 6
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

iv. details regarding guest check-in and check-out procedures;
v. management of car parking;
vi. details regarding waste management which must include specifying the
expectations on guests with regard to general rubbish and bin collection (if
applicable);
vii. compliance with Strata By-Laws (if applicable) in the form of a Statement of
Compliance.
5.3 The use is required to operate in accordance with the operational management plan
with condition to be included as a condition of any development approval issued.
6 Consultation
6.1 Proposals will be advertised for public comment in accordance with the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 and the City’s Local
Planning Policy 1.1 – Planning Processes and Decision Making.
6.2 Where an application involves short term rental accommodation land uses in a strata
title arrangement, applicants are required to demonstrate that the operation of short-
term rental accommodation is compliant with regulations governing ownership of the
property i.e. provisions of the Strata Titles Act 1985 and associated by-laws and/or
management orders. This may require a copy of the strata by-laws being provided
and ideally also the strata body’s consent (otherwise the strata body or all other strata
owners will be consulted by the City).
7 Temporary Approval
7.1 Where necessary to allow ongoing monitoring of the impacts of short-term rental
accommodation, the approval period may be limited in accordance with Clause 72 of
Schedule 2 of the Regulations. This is likely to be applied in circumstances where
discretion has been applied in the decision to enable monitoring of the use prior to
any future on-going approval.
References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Health Act 1911
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Australian National Construction Code
Australian/NZ Standard 2890.6 for parking for people with
disabilities and Fire safety requirements
Building Act 2011
Building Regulations 2012
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No. 6
Residential Design Codes Volume 1
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 25/08/2025 2:00 PM Page 5 of 6
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Residential Design Codes Volume 2 (Apartments)
Local Planning Policy 1.6 – Parking and Access
Delegated Authority No: DA – 020: Planning and Related matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Ordinary Meeting of Council 18 May 2021 P21/3898
Reviews
Ordinary Meeting of Council 19 August 2025 UP25/78
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 25/08/2025 2:00 PM Page 6 of 6
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.