Local Planning
Policy 2.24
Waste Management Plans
fremantle.wa.gov.au

Waste Management Plans
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. This Policy may be cited as Local Planning
Policy: Waste Management Plans (LPP 2.24).
Clause 65A of the Deemed Provisions permits the local government to request additional
information to support an application for development approval under the planning scheme.
Clause 67 (2) of the Deemed Provisions outlines the matters local government is to have
regard for in considering the application, and includes the adequacy of provision for the
management, storage and collection of waste.
Residential Design Codes Volume 2 – Apartments, Waste Management Acceptable Outcomes
(4.17), references the WALGA Multiple Dwelling Waste Management Plan Guidelines in
providing for sufficient waste storage facilities for Multiple Dwelling developments.
Introduction
The purpose of this policy is to:
1. specify when details of waste management will be required to support the assessment
of applications for development approval; and
2. confirm the City’s broad expectations with respect to the accommodation of waste
management in new development.
Objectives
The objectives of this policy are as follows:
• Functionality – To ensure that waste facilities for development are functional and
readily used by all stakeholders.
• Amenity – To ensure that waste facilities minimise negative impacts on the
streetscape, building entries and the amenity of residents and visitors.
• Safety – To maintain safety for the waste collection staff, residents / business
operators and the public, and minimise traffic and footpath obstruction in the public
realm.
• Waste minimisation – To promote waste-to-landfill minimisation through provision of
safe and convenient bins and information for the separation and recycling of waste.
1/3

Application of this Policy
The policy applies to all development subject to development approval within the Local
Planning Scheme area.
Policy Provisions
All development should make adequate provision for the management, storage and
collection of waste.
To optimise outcomes and facilitate streamlined assessment and approval, proponents
should consult with the City’s Waste team early in design development.
1. Integrated Waste Management Planning
1.1 A waste management plan will be required to accompany development proposing:
• 4 or more Grouped Dwellings;
• Multiple Dwellings
• Proposals involving constrained lots (e.g. lots with limited street frontage, or
on laneways); and
• All new non-residential development, including mixed use development and
changes of use, and substantial additions or alterations to existing
development likely to affect waste generation.
1.2 Waste management details may be requested for other development proposals in
instances where a proposal may not be able to readily satisfy standard waste
collection requirements, at the discretion of the City.
1.3 The City may waive the requirement for a waste management plan at its sole
discretion, for example, where it is satisfied that the proposal will not substantially
affect existing waste management for the development site.
1.4 Waste management plans are to be prepared in accordance with the City’s Waste
Management Guidelines and (where relevant) WALGA’s Waste Management Plan
Guidelines for New Multi Dwelling Developments, WALGA’s Better Practice
Guidelines for Multi Dwelling Developments and/or WALGA’s Commercial and
Industrial Waste Management Plan Guidelines. For simple development proposals
(for example: small grouped dwelling developments, small-tenancy changes of
use), a plan indicating bin storage, presentation areas and dimensions may be
sufficient.
2. Minimising Street Impacts
2.1 All waste storage and removal should occur on-site to minimise the visual and
odour impacts of bins on streets and public spaces.
2/3

2.2 Developments are to demonstrate suitable internal storage areas and collection
pathways for bin pickup.
2.3 The City may consider other arrangements in exceptional circumstances such as
irregular shaped lots or where such a proposal would be detrimental to the heritage
of a place and there are no suitable alternatives.
3. Waste Reduction and Resource Recovery
3.1 Waste management plans should demonstrate how developments will actively
promote waste reduction and resource recovery in line with the City’s sustainability
objectives.
Responsibility and review information
Responsible officer: Manager Strategic Planning and City Design
Document 19 January 2022 – PC2201-09
adoption/approval
details
Document 13 August 2025 – Ordinary Meeting of Council - C2508-6
amendment details
Next review date 13 August 2029
3/3