Residential Development
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP3.1
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 17 May 2022
Background
Many physical attributes combine to define local residential character and create attractive
streetscapes. These include the location and appearance of buildings, the extent to which they are
set back from the street, the existence of landscaping, the siting and design of front fencing, and
the existence of other structures located within the street setback area.
Residential streetscapes within the City of Melville are generally characterised by a continuity of
buildings setback from the street and from each other. Infill development and the pressure for
increased housing density associated with such development, brings with it a number of
challenges in terms of creating and maintaining attractive and locally distinctive residential
streetscapes.
Whilst new development is encouraged to generally conform to the established pattern and be of
consistent scale to that existing within existing streetscapes, the challenge is to enable increased
density to occur without unreasonable restriction whilst safeguarding the common features of the
streetscape that combine to make the residential areas of the City of Melville what they are.
Policy Objectives
The objectives of this policy are:
• To enhance the character and amenity of existing residential areas;
• To promote a high standard of residential development;
• To ensure new residential development makes a positive contribution towards attractive
streetscapes;
• To allow for innovative residential design providing the development is compatible with the
streetscape.
• To accommodate increasing residential density without compromising streetscape character.
• To ensure that residential environments are safe and secure for owners, occupiers, and the
wider community;
• To safeguard, protect and enhance the levels of residential amenity enjoyed by existing and
future owners and occupiers of residential property; and
• To reduce the impact of vehicle access and on site car parking spaces on the streetscape.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 27/05/2022 1:37 PM Page 1 of 8
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Policy Scope
Under Clause 25 of Local Planning Scheme No. 6 (LPS6) the R-Codes are to be read as a part of
the Scheme.
Part 7 ‘Local Planning Framework of State Planning Policy 7.3 Residential Design Codes Volume 1
(the R-Codes Volume 1) allows local planning policies to amend or replace various deemed-to-
comply provisions This policy amends the Deemed to Comply provisions in Clauses 5.1.2, 5.1.3
5.2.1, 5.2.2, 5.2.4, 5.2.5 and 5.4.3. If a proposal does not meet the amended deemed to comply
provisions in this policy then it will require a performance assessment against the relevant Design
Principle in the R-Codes.
This local planning policy applies to all residential development, covered by R-Codes Volume 1,
within the City of Melville unless another document such as LPS6, an activity centre plan and any
other relevant local or Council policy specifies otherwise.
Definitions / Abbreviations Used In Policy
LPS6 City of Melville Local Planning Scheme No. 6
Gatehouse A gatehouse is a small arch or patio-like structure used as an entrance feature to a
property.
R-Codes State Planning Policy 7.3 - Residential Design Codes Volume 1 and Volume 2
Unless otherwise stated terms used in this policy have the same definition as in LPS6 or the R-
Codes
Policy Statement
1 Street Setback
The Deemed-to-Comply provisions of Clause 5.1.2of the R-Codes are replaced with the following:
C2.1 Buildings, excluding carports, unenclosed porches, balconies, verandahs, or equivalent, set
back from the primary street boundary:
i in accordance with Table 1; or
ii corresponding to the average of the setback of existing dwellings on each adjacent
property fronting the same street; or
iii reduced by up to 50 per cent provided that the area of any building, including a
garage encroaching into the setback area, is compensated for by at least an equal
area of open space that is located between the setback line and line drawn parallel
to it at twice the setback distance (refer Figure 2a and 2c);
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 27/05/2022 1:37 PM Page 2 of 8
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

iv in the case of grouped dwellings, where on-site car parking for the street facing
dwelling is provided at the rear of the lot, the average front setback requirement in
Table 1 and Clause 5.1.2 may be reduced by up to 1.0m;
v in the case of areas coded R15 or higher, the street setback may be reduced to 3m,
or 2m to a porch, balcony, verandah or the equivalent (refer Figure 2e), where:
• a grouped dwelling has its main frontage to a secondary street, or
• a single house results from subdivision of an original corner lot; or
• a single house or grouped dwelling (where that grouped dwelling is not adjacent
to the primary street), has its main frontage to a communal street, right-of-way or
shared pedestrian or vehicle access way;
vi to provide for registered easements for essential services.
vii minor projections such as eaves and other architectural features may project up to
700mm forward of the minimum street setback.
C2.2 Development on corner lots is to be designed and setback in accordance with the following:
i New dwellings are to be designed to address both street frontages through the
location of major openings and the articulation of the façade on all levels.
ii Buildings on properties with a density coding of less than R30, setback a minimum
of 1.5m and an average of 3m from the secondary street and the corner truncation
boundary;
iii Buildings on properties with a density coding of R30 and greater, setback a
minimum of 1.0m and an average of 1.5m from the secondary street and the corner
truncation boundary;
C2.3 An unenclosed porch, balcony, verandah or the equivalent may (subject to the Building
Code of Australia) project into the primary or secondary street setback area by up to 50 per
cent of the required setback without applying the compensating area of clause 5.2.1 C2.1 iii
(Refer Figure 2e).
2 Setback of Garages and Carports
The Deemed-to-Comply provisions in Clause 5.2.1 of the R-Codes are replaced with the following:
C1.1 Garages set back 4.5m from the primary street except that the setback may be reduced:
i. in accordance with Figure 8b where the garage adjoins a dwelling provided the
garage is at least 0.5m behind the dwelling alignment (excluding any porch,
verandah or balcony); or.
ii. to 3m where the garage allows vehicles to be parked parallel to the street. The wall
parallel to the street must include openings.
C.1.2 Carports set back in accordance with the primary street setback requirements of clause
5.1.2 C2.1i, except that the setback may be reduced by up to 50 per cent of the minimum
setback stated in Table 1 where:
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 27/05/2022 1:37 PM Page 3 of 8
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

i. the width of the carport does not exceed 60 per cent of the frontage;
ii. the construction allows an unobstructed view between the dwelling and the street,
right-of-way or equivalent; and
iii. the carport roof pitch, colours and materials are compatible with the dwelling. (Refer
to Figure 8a)
C1.3 Garages and carports built up to the boundary abutting a communal street or right-of-way
which is not the primary or secondary street boundary for the dwelling, with manoeuvring
space of at least 6m, located immediately in front of the opening to the garage or carport
and permanently available.
C1.4 Garages set back 3.0m from a secondary street.
C1.5 Carports set back 1.5m from a secondary street and designed to the standards contained in
Clause C.1.2 above.
C1.6 Carports within the street setback area in accordance with clause 5.1.2 C2.1iii provided that
the width of the carport does not exceed 50 per cent of the frontage at the building line and
the construction allows an unobstructed view between the dwelling and the street, right-of-
way or equivalent (refer to Figure 8a)
3 Fences and Street Walls
The Deemed-to-Comply provisions in Clause 5.2.4 of the R-Codes are replaced with the following:
C4.1 Front fences within the primary street setback area that are visually permeable above 1.2m
of natural ground level, measured from the primary street side of the front fence (refer
Figure 12).
C4.2 Fencing within the secondary street setback area may be solid only where it abuts the
primary outdoor living area. The remaining fencing is to be visually permeable above 1.2m
of natural ground level, measured from the street side of the fence.
C4.3 Maximum fence height is 2.0m to the top of piers and 1.8m to the top of panels.
C4.4 A solid portion of wall 1.8 m in height and 1.0m wide is permitted to accommodate a metre
box and other similar services subject to this being located outside of the sightlines
truncation area.
C4.5 Where a retaining wall is visible above the road reserve level, the visible height of the
retaining wall is to be taken into account in the assessment of fence height.
C4.6 A gatehouse located within the primary or secondary street setback area is to satisfy all of
the following:
i The gate or entry way is to be visually permeable;
ii The maximum width and length of the gatehouse is to be 2.0m or 20% of the
lot frontage, whichever is the lesser;
iii 2.4m wall height, 3m overall height;
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 27/05/2022 1:37 PM Page 4 of 8
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

iv Constructed of materials which are compatible with the dwelling or front
fence; and
v Encouraged to have individual style and interest.
4 Garage Width
The Deemed-to-Comply provisions in Clause 5.2.2 of the R-Codes are replaced with the following:
C2.1 A garage door and supporting structures (or a garage wall where the garage is aligned
parallel to the street) shall not occupy more than 50% of the lot frontage; or.
C2.2 For front loaded single storey dwellings on street frontages between 10.0m and 12.0m, a
double garage and supporting structures (or a garage wall where the garage is aligned
parallel to the street) is permitted to a maximum width of 6m as viewed from the street
subject to:
i The garage being setback a minimum of 1.0m behind a habitable room; and
ii There being a minimum 2.0m2 major opening to the habitable room directly
facing the primary street; and
iii A minimum of two wall materials (not including two render colours); and
iv There being an entry feature consisting of a porch, portico or veranda with
the following features;
a. Minimum depth of 1.0m; and
b. A feature roof form which incorporates an eave/gutter line higher
than the garage or a gable end; and
c. A pier or post positioned in front of one portion of the supporting
garage wall.
v No vehicular crossover being wider than 4.5m where it meets the street; and
vi A landscape plan
C2.3 For front loaded dwellings of two storeys or more, a garage door and supporting structures
(or a garage wall where the garage is aligned parallel to the street) may occupy up to 60%
of the frontage at the setback line as viewed from the street, where the upper floor;
i extends for the full width of the garage and its supporting structures; and
ii is located in front of or in line with the garage; and
iii the entrance to the dwelling is clearly visible from the primary street.
5 Sight lines
The Deemed-to-Comply provisions in Clause 5.2.5 of the R-Codes Volume 1 of the R-Codes are
replaced with the following:
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 27/05/2022 1:37 PM Page 5 of 8
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

C5.1/C3.1 Walls, fences and other structures truncated or reduced to no higher than 0.75m
within 1.5m of where they adjoin vehicle access points where a driveway meets a
public street and where two streets intersect; or
C5.2/C3.2 One pier to a maximum width of 0.35m located within the truncation area. In order to
minimise the obstruction caused by development in the truncation area, the wall
height in the truncation area shall be a maximum of 0.75m measured from the verge
height and fencing above shall be 80% visually permeable.
6 Boundary Walls
The Deemed-to-Comply provisions in Clauses 5.1.3 (C3.2) of the R-Codes are replaced with the
following, and an additional deemed-to-comply provision C.3.5 is introduced. All other deemed-to-
comply provisions in clauses in 5.1.3 remain as per the R-Codes. :
C3.2 Boundary walls may be built within the following limits and subject to the overshadowing
provisions of Clause 5.4.2 and Figure Series 11.
i where the wall abuts an existing or simultaneously constructed wall of similar or
greater dimension;
ii in areas coded less than R20, walls not higher than 3m for a length of 9m behind
the primary street setback line specified in Table 1 of the R-Codes, to side
boundaries only (excludes the rear boundary of the parent lot);
iii in areas coded R20 and R25, walls not higher than 3.5m up to a maximum length of
the greater of 9m or one-third the length of the balance of each lot boundary behind
the front setback.
iv in areas coded R30 and higher, walls not higher than 3.5m for two-thirds the length
of the balance of each lot boundary behind the front setback.
v in areas coded R20 or more, boundary walls are permitted forward of the primary
street setback specified in Table 1, subject to meeting the average front setback
required by Clause 5.1.2.
vi. where both the subject site and the affected adjoining site are created in a plan of
subdivision submitted concurrently for the proposed development and the boundary
walls are interfacing and of equal dimension.
C3.5 Vertical screening structures constructed within 0.6m of the boundary which project more
than 1.8m above the natural ground level are assessed as boundary walls pursuant to
Clause 5.1.3 (C3.2 and C3.3) above.
Note: Boundary walls, retaining walls and vertical screening structures shall be finished to the
satisfaction of the City.
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 27/05/2022 1:37 PM Page 6 of 8
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

7 Outbuildings
The Deemed-to-Comply provisions in Clauses 5.4.3 of the R-Codes are replaced with the
following,
C3 Outbuildings associated with a dwelling site address either:
i. the standards for small outbuildings (A. Small outbuilding); or
ii. the standards for large and multiple outbuildings (B. Large and multiple outbuildings).
A. Small outbuilding (i) no more than one outbuilding per dwelling site;
(ii) has no more than two boundary walls;
(iii) does not exceed 10m2 in area;
(iv) does not exceed a wall and ridge height of 2.7m;
(v) not located within the primary or secondary street
setback area; and
(vi) does not reduce open space and outdoor living area
requirements in Table 1.
OR
B. Large and multiple (i) individually or collectively does not exceed 60m2 in
outbuildings area or 10 per cent in aggregate of the site area,
whichever is the lesser;
(ii) set back in accordance with Table 2a or comply with
the boundary wall provisions of this policy;
(iii) does not exceed a wall height of 2.7m;
(iv) does not exceed a ridge height of 4.2m;
(v) not located within the primary or secondary street
setback area; and
(vi) does not reduce the open space and outdoor living
area requirements in Table 1.
Notes:
i. An outbuilding wall that meets (ii) for small outbuildings does not contribute to the
number or dimension of boundary walls under clause 5.1.3.
ii. An existing outbuilding that meets the development standards for small outbuildings
does not need to be setback in accordance with Table 2a for additional outbuildings that
are proposed under B. Large and multiple outbuildings.
iii. There are separate building code requirements that may also apply
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 27/05/2022 1:37 PM Page 7 of 8
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: State Planning Policy 7.3: Residential Design Codes
Volume 1
State Planning Policy 7.3: Residential Design Codes
Volume 2 - ApartmentsCP-029: Tree Policy
LPP1.1 Planning Process and Decision Making
LPP1.8 Crime Prevention through Environmental Design
of Buildings
LPP1.1 Amenity
LPP1.2 Design Review Panel
LPP1.5 Energy Efficiency in Building Design
Delegated Authority DA – 020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/11/2011 P11/3248
REVIEWS
Ordinary Meeting of Council 19/11/2013 P13/3438
Ordinary Meeting of Council 15/11/2016 P16/3728
Administrative Review (Council Resolution 18/6/2019) M19/5691
Ordinary Meeting of Council 17/05/2022 P22/3981
UNCONTROLLED DOCUMENT WHEN PRINTED - THIS VERSION: 27/05/2022 1:37 PM Page 8 of 8
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.