WESTERN AUSTRALIAN
PLANNING COMMISSION
4
.
2
C
D
.
O
N
Y
C
I
L
O
P
S
E
T
I
S
L
O
O
H
C
S
CONTENTS
Background Notes 3
1. Introduction 4
2. Policy Objectives 4
3. Policy Measures 4
3.1 The Demand for School Sites 4
3.2 Location of Schools Within Catchments 5
3.3 Site Requirements 5
3.4 Site Selection and Planning 6
3.5 Access Issues 7
3.6 Relationship to Nearby Land Uses 7
3.7 Children’s Services Facilities 7
3.8 Consultation 8

Western Australian Planning Commission - Policy DC 2.4 - October 1998
5
.
2
C
D
.
O
N
Y
C
I
L
O
P
S
E
T
I
S
L
O
O
H
C
S
BACKGROUND NOTES
1. This Policy Statement contains the Commission’s general requirements for school
and TAFE college (technical college) sites in residential areas, and recognises the
need to consider any requirements for higher education facilities. It should be used
during the preparation of designs for the subdivision of residential land at both the
structure planning (district and local structure planning) and subdivision design
stages. Guidelines for the Preparation of Local Structure Plans for Urban Release
Areas are included elsewhere in this manual.
2. The policy identifies when there is a need to consider the provision of sites for new
schools, sets criteria for the selection of such sites, and includes requirements for
their design and location within new subdivisions. The policy also incorporates the
relevant road safety measures recommended in the Task Force on Road Safety at
Schools Report 1992for primary and secondary schools. The Commission expects
that discussions with the relevant education authority will be held at an early stage
of the process upon the detail of particular proposals.
3. The policy has been prepared in close consultation with government and non-
government school providers representative of a number of interested State
Government departments and instrumentalities as well as the Catholic Education
Commission and other non-government school authorities which are the main non-
government school providers. The policy largely reflects current practice in the
provision of school sites.
4. The policy incorporates guidelines for the establishment and location of children’s
services facilities associated with school sites and the co-location and joint planning
of facilities for multiple purpose community use.
5. The Commission has released the Liveable Neighbourhoods:Community Design
Codewhich is a new design code to help make the State’s suburban areas more
sustainable and offer a wider range of housing and employment to support changing
community needs and preferences. The code has been released for an initial period
of 12 months to test and refine aspects in practice. This policy, and the related
Guidelines for the Preparation of Local Structure Plans for Urban Release Areas
will be modified where appropriate following the review and refinement of Liveable
Neighbourhoods.
6. Other Policy Statements and Guidelines of the Commission which deal with
requirements for the subdivision of residential land and should be considered along
with this policy are:
Policy No. DC 2.1 - Residential Planning Codes
Policy No. DC 2.2 - Residential Subdivision
Policy No. DC 2.3 - Public Open Space
Policy No. DC 2.6 - Residential Road Planning
Guidelines for the Preparation of Local Structure Plans for Urban Release
Areas (currently under review).
3

1. INTRODUCTION 3.1.2 The Department of Education and the main
non-government education providers require
the following provision of school sites.
1.1 This Policy Statement sets out general criteria
and design standards for the provision of
Primary Schools - one site for between 1,500
school sites in residential districts. It also
and 1,800 housing units for government
contains the requirements for TAFE colleges
schools.
(technical colleges) and recognises the need to
consider any requirements for higher Secondary Schools - one site for every four or
education facilities. five primary schools for government schools.
1.2 The policy is intended to overcome problems While the basis for providing non-government
of conflict that may arise in residential areas schools will be different from government
between schools and their surroundings schools, their provision at the average ratio of
particularly in respect of traffic and noise one non-government to three government
generating activities. The Commission primary schools and one to two for secondary
believes future problems can largely be schools may be an appropriate basis for
eliminated by judicious subdivision design. planning.
1.3 The site selection criteria and design standards 3.1.3 The development of schools sponsored by
in this statement are intended to apply to new groups other than the major non-government
residential subdivisions. They may not systems should also be considered. Such
necessarily be applied to situations where schools are typically, although not always,
changes of use or rezonings are proposed in small in size and draw their pupils from a
already developed residential areas. wide area. Demand for sites from these
groups often does not materialise until
neighbourhoods are well established. The
Commission encourages these groups to make
2. POLICY OBJECTIVES
expressions of interest, as early as possible in
the subdivision design stage (preferably at the
o To make provision for school sites and structure planning stage), to enable provision
other education facilities related to to be made for a suitable site in the
community needs. subdivision. This will require negotiation
between the subdivider and the group
o To indicate school site requirements,
concerned as to location, size and method of
specify criteria for selecting new sites,
acquisition.
and to establish guidelines for their
design and location in new subdivisions. 3.1.4 In some circumstances, particularly in country
areas, the provision of separate primary and
secondary schools cannot always be justified.
In such areas, the Education Department and
3. POLICY MEASURES
the Office of Non-Government Education
should be consulted to determine whether
3.1 The Demand for School Sites there should be sites set aside for separate
primary and secondary schools (Years 1 to
3.1.1 Experience has shown that there is a 10), or whether provision should be made for
correlation between the number of single a shared facility between education providers.
residential lots created by subdivision and the
3.1.5 For TAFE colleges (technical colleges), there
need for school sites. However, although that
is a general correlation between population
correlation is useful in determining a broad
and the need for college sites. The general
need for new school sites, it is necessary in
requirement is one site for every 60,000 to
each particular case to assess that need against
70,000 population. This may vary in densely
existing school sites, established schools, rate
populated urban areas, where the viable
and type of development (including the
population for a TAFE college can be as high
consideration of demographic profiles and
as 250,000 because of the particular
block pricing policies), the opportunities for
demographic characteristics of the area. It
co-location of other human services, etc. In
may also vary where the following conditions
this regard, it is important that the subdivision
apply;
design of broadacre land into urban lots be
done in consultation with both government
• if the planned residential development is
and non-government education providers.
in a remote location where access to
alternative TAFE facilities is limited:
4 Western Australian Planning Commission - Policy DC 2.4 - October 1998

Western Australian Planning Commission - Policy DC 2.4 - October 1998
5
.
2
C
D
.
O
N
Y
C
I
L
O
P
S
E
T
I
S
L
O
O
H
C
S
• if the planned residential development is by bicycle or on foot. Careful design and sit-
located close to significant industrial, ing of secondary school sites and the location
commercial or rural development; of buildings on them can help to minimise
their impact upon the amenity of nearby
• if the planned residential development is
residential properties.
in an area where a higher than average
proportion of the population can be 3.2.4 Primary schools should be located on or near a
expected to be disadvantaged. local distributor road (preferably the local bus
route), in the centre of the neighbourhood
3.2 Location of Schools Within which it is intended to serve. Secondary
Catchments schools can be located at the edge of a suburb,
provided they are close to a point where
3.2.1 The Commission will encourage wherever district distributor roads connect with the
possible the integration of schools within local primary network. Main Roads Western
communities and cooperation with local Australia has undertaken work on devices to
governments in the provision of a wide range slow the passing traffic adjacent to school en-
of sporting, recreational and cultural facilities. trances, and local governments may wish to
consult with Main Roads at the road design
3.2.2 Aprimary school site should be located stage.
conveniently to the catchment area it is
intended to serve. The trend towards larger
schools may require neighbourhoods to share
3.3 SITE REQUIREMENTS
a school, rather than locating one in the centre
of one neighbourhood which is less
convenient to the others that it serves. Most 3.3.1 The following sizes of school sites have been
children either walk or cycle to school, but it adopted by education authorities as a general
must be recognised that there will be a guide to the desirable size for each type:
significant number of children who travel in
private cars or on public transport. In country Education Other non-
Department government
areas, the wide use of school buses means that
schools
easy road access can be of even greater
importance. Two important considerations Primary School 4ha 4ha
flow from this. The first is the need for a Secondary School 10ha 8ha - 10ha
primary school site to be located close to a District High School 6ha 6ha
local distributor road to ensure ease of access
Combined Primary - 10-12ha
by vehicles, and proximity (where
and Secondary
appropriate) to public transport routes.
Secondly, it needs to be recognised that a 3.3.2 These sizes are based upon the provision by
school is not a facility that can be adequately the authorities of fairly standard facilities for a
serviced by an access road network given the given number of children and assumes the
amount of traffic generated and the loss of land is all useable. The site requirements for
residential amenity which it causes. schools may vary depending upon a number of
factors including:
3.2.3 Secondary schools service larger catchments
and rely more on public transport, both • demand for individual schools and
scheduled and chartered services, and associated facilities such as children’s
accessibility is, therefore, of even greater services facilities which normally require
importance. Centrality within those an additional site area of 3,000m2(refer
catchments, although desirable, is secondary to section 3.7);
to access. Because secondary schools are more
reliant upon vehicular transport and cater for a • the need for adequate pick-up and set-
large number of students, their impact upon down areas where this cannot be
local residential amenity is greater, as is the provided off-site (refer to section 3.5);
need for sensitivity of siting. While centrality
• co-location with public open space,
remains important within those catchments,
community facility sites and other
ease of access is also an important
schools subject to agreements being
consideration. Given this, secondary school
reached between the various parties on
sites should be set aside with accessibility as
the sharing of facilities.
an important consideration, not only for those
students arriving by public transport and
private cars but also those travelling to school
5

In addition, the Catholic Education 18 months of approval. In the event of a site
Commission will normally require a primary for a proposed primary school being surplus to
school site of 5ha where a church and the requirements of the community, the land
associated community facilities are included should be offered for disposal of to the
on the site. contributing landowners in accordance with
the policy of the Department of Land
3.3.3 The Commission recognises that there are
Administration.
significant benefits in terms of efficient use of
land and physical resources in the joint use of
school facilities with those of the general
3.4 SITE SELECTION AND
public. The potential for this should be
considered at the design stage of new PLANNING
subdivisions which will require liaison
between human service providers including
3.4.1 The physical condition of the selected land is
agencies such as local governments and the
particularly important. There is a need to en-
education providers.
sure that the area to be occupied by buildings
is level, in order to produce a satisfactory rela-
3.3.4 Where a school site is co-located with public
tionship between buildings and any adjoining
open space, that open space is fully utilised by
hard-surfaced play areas. Second, there is a
the school and arrangements are in place to
need to provide level, grassed, recreation areas
the satisfaction of the local government to
for organised sports and games.
provide long-term contributions from the
education provider for the management of the
3.4.2 For these and general economic reasons, land
open space, the land requirement for the
for school sites should generally be level, al-
school may be reduced. In these
though gently sloping sites may be acceptable.
circumstances a primary school site of 3.5ha
Sites with extreme topographical features in-
in size may be acceptable.
volving extensive on-site earthworks and/or
importation of fill, or sites containing rock
3.3.5 For TAFE colleges, depending on the range of
outcrops or land liable to inundation are not
programs to be offered and the style of
acceptable unless such area is additional to the
delivery most suited to the needs of the target
minimum area required.
population, the facilities can range in size. It
is not considered feasible to plan a facility on
3.4.3 Public utilities such as drainage sumps,
a site less than 11ha, and the optimal size to
compensating basins, high tension
provide for future growth is 25ha.
transmission lines and transformer pads for
underground power are not acceptable within
3.3.6 TAFE colleges should, where possible, be
the land area requirement for school sites.
located adjacent to other post-secondary
Other easements and reserves for public
education and secondary education facilities in
utilities such as sewerage and drainage mains
the area. Where flexible learning centres are
and underground pumping stations should be
incorporated into a TAFE college, co-location
included in the land area requirement of
with the more traditional community resource
school sites only where these can be
centres is desirable. Sites should have good
demonstrated to be safe and useable.
access via the primary and district distributor
road network and be located on public
3.4.4 Consistent with other considerations such as
transport routes.
topography and accessibility, all school sites
should be regular in shape and preferably
3.3.7 In broadacre subdivision where the particular
rectangular. In no instance should the length
subdivision generates the need for a primary
of the site exceed twice the width. Acute
school the subdivider should provide for the
boundary angles with the consequent unusable
ceding of the government primary school site
spaces are not acceptable.
free of cost. Where land is in multiple
ownership the subdividing landowners should
3.4.5 All appropriate services should be made avail-
provide a pro-rata contribution for the
able to the school site, especially to that part
acquisition of the primary school site. Where
selected for the construction of buildings.
a school site is identified within a subdividing
landowner’s land the Commission will require
as a condition of subdivision that
arrangements be made to ensure that the land
is transferred to the Education Department
within a defined time period, generally within
6 Western Australian Planning Commission - Policy DC 2.4 - October 1998

Western Australian Planning Commission - Policy DC 2.4 - October 1998
5
.
2
C
D
.
O
N
Y
C
I
L
O
P
S
E
T
I
S
L
O
O
H
C
S
3.5 ACCESS ISSUES Structure Plans for Urban Release Areas,
included elsewhere in this manual, incorporate
the principles that should be applied.
3.5.1 School and TAFE college sites should be
provided with frontage access to through roads
constructed on at least two sides. These roads
must be designed (with an appropriate 3.6 RELATIONSHIP TO
carriageway width and traffic management
NEARBY LAND USES
devices as set out in Policy DC 2.6 -
Residential Road Planning) to allow for the
safe pick-up and set-down of students from 3.6.1 Common boundaries of school sites with
both private cars and public transport systems residential uses should be avoided whenever
within the road reserve. Culs-de-sac or possible. There are a number of activities
underwidth roads are not acceptable for this conducted on school sites which can adversely
purpose. affect the amenity of residential properties,
particularly where they are located very close
3.5.2 While facilities to pick up and set down to a school site. This is a growing problem
should be within the road reserve, any with the trend towards increased community
additional associated land requirement should use of school facilities after hours. To avoid
be provided from the land allocated for the potential conflict with residential properties it
school site and provided by the school is therefore preferable that school sites be
authority. On site parking may need to be surrounded by a combination of roads and
provided within the school site or on an amenities generally, including public open
adjacent reserve. space and other compatible community,
cultural recreation and sporting facilities.
3.5.3 Road carriageways and traffic management
devices (including on-street embayments and 3.6.2 There are other land uses such as certain types
raised pedestrian crossings) should be of shop or licensed premises which can affect
provided by the subdivider at the time of school sites and careful consideration needs to
subdivision to the satisfaction of the local be given during the design stage to ensure that
government, and also the Education school sites are compatible with their
Department in the case of government neighbours.
schools. The cost of on-street embayments
and raised pedestrian crossings should be
shared on a 50/50 basis by the subdivider and
3.7 CHILDREN’S SERVICES
the school authority. The sharing of costs by
subdividers may be spread across the FACILITIES
catchment area of the school. Where
subdivisions occur well ahead of the
3.7.1 Children’s services facilities include both child
establishment of the school (i.e. high school
care centres and other multi-functional
sites) the subdivider will normally be required facilities. These facilities could provide child-
to deposit a cash equivalent for the
related services such as long day care,
construction with the local government.
occasional care, playgroups and out-of-school
hours care. Because of the considerable
3.5.4 Apart from accessibility by road, school sites
advantages of developing multi-purpose
should also provide a strong local focus for
community buildings (e.g. better co-ordination
pedestrian and cycleway systems in the
of services, easier access and the need to
neighbourhood. Preferably these systems
develop fewer sites), these facilities may also
should lead as directly, conveniently and safe-
provide a venue for other community uses
ly as possible to the school. Where there is a
associated with young children, adults and
need to cross significant distributor roads,
seniors.
careful consideration should be given to the
nature of the crossing, whether it be by grade
3.7.2 The co-location of children’s services facilities
separation, controlled lights, intersection sep-
with primary schools has advantages for both.
aration, manned crossing or other acceptable
Convenience is offered to parents of children
alternatives. attending both facilities while interaction
between the two services provides a smooth
3.5.5 The vehicle/pedestrian/cycle access and road
transition for children entering the primary
safety needs of schools should be considered
school system. Co-located children’s services
at the local structure planning stage. The
facilities also provide a venue for other
Guidelines for the Preparation of Local
associated school activities.
7

3.7.3 Children’s services facilities should generally
be provided within primary school sites at a
ratio of one for every two primary school
developments in new subdivisions. Where
such facilities cannot be accommodated within
the site allocated for the school, provision for
the acquisition of additional land should be
made by the service provider.
3.8 CONSULTATION
3.8.1 It is important that those involved in subdivi-
sional design confer regularly with the
Education Department, non-government
education providers (where appropriate) and
the Commission during the design process.
3.8.2 Prior to commencement of design, contact
with the Education Department and the major
non-government education providers will
identify the extent to which provision should
be made for new school sites and whether
parts of the land area to be subdivided are
capable of being serviced by existing schools.
Where appropriate other non-government
education providers should be made aware of
the subdivision and be invited to submit
expressions of interest. Early contact should
also be made with the authority responsible
for administering the TAFE system and the
WAOffice of Higher Education to establish
any site requirements.
3.8.3 As the design work continues and school sites
are selected, further contact should be made
with officers of the Education Department,
non-government education providers and the
Commission to determine the general
acceptability of proposed sites. Consultation
with the Department of Family and Children’s
Services will also determine the need for, and
correct location of, any sites for children’s
services facilities.
8 Western Australian Planning Commission - Policy DC 2.4 - October 1998