Position
Statement:
Public Open Space
19 December 2025
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the Department © State of Western Australian website: wa.gov.au/dplh
of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf of the Western email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
Australian Planning Commission. Any representation, Published by the
statement, opinion or advice expressed or implied in this Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002
publication is made in good faith and on the basis that the Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
Government, its employees and agents are not liable for 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
any damage or loss whatsoever which may occur as a result Perth WA 6000
of action taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect This document is available in alternative
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred Locked Bag 2506 formats on application to the
to herein. Professional advice should be obtained before Perth WA 6001 Communications Branch.
applying the information contained in this document to Publication date: 08/05/2026
particular circumstances. Operational date: 19/12/2025

Position Statement: 1
Public Open Space
19 December 2025
1. Citation 3. Planning for Public Non-residential or rural living areas may
Open Space in also generate a need for POS in some
This is a Position Statement prepared circumstances, though the requirements
Western Australia
under Part 14 of the Planning and for, rate of provision, and contribution may
Development Act 2005. It may be cited as differ from those in residential areas.
The role of Public Open Space (POS)
Position Statement Public Open Space.
across Western Australia’s urban areas is
This policy replaces:
increasingly important as private green
4. Application of this
1. Development Control Policy 2.3 Public spaces decrease, population densities
Open Space in residential areas increase and community, infrastructure position statement
and environmental needs expand.
2. Position Statement Expenditure of
This Position Statement applies to
cash in lieu of public open space. Appropriate and contemporary planning
the preparation and assessment of
for POS is essential to ensure that the
planning instruments including local
POS is responsive, well-located and
planning strategies, local planning
functional, achieving the desired
2. Policy intent schemes, structure plans and subdivision
recreational, amenity, health, cultural and
applications, including all strata
environmental outcomes for the whole
The intent of this Position Statement is to: subdivision, within Western Australia.
community.
• Ensure public open space (POS) is The long-standing provision, originating
an essential consideration across the from recommendations made within the
5. Policy objectives
planning framework; 1955 Plan for the Metropolitan Region
Perth and Fremantle (the Stephenson-
• Ensure all communities have well- The policy objectives for public open
Hepburn Plan) for POS to be set aside at a
planned POS that adequately provides space are to:
minimum rate of 10 per cent of residential
for evolving community needs in a
areas, shall continue to form a sound basis a) Ensure an adequate quantity and
predictable and equitable manner;
for POS provision across all communities. contemporary quality of accessible
• Establish a consistent minimum Furthermore, all applications generating POS in all urban areas.
standard for contributions towards POS, increased demand for POS shall be
b) Promote decision-making that
where the creation of additional lots considered for a contribution towards
enhances community amenity, health
generates the need for an increase in POS. This contribution may be in the form
and liveability while responding to
either POS quantity or functionality; and of suitable land or cash in lieu to help
our recreational, sporting, leisure,
facilitate new POS or upgrades to existing
• Provide guidance on the collection, environmental, infrastructure and
POS.
expenditure and management of cash economic requirements.
in lieu contributions towards POS to
benefit the community.

Position Statement: 2
Public Open Space
19 December 2025
c) Implement a consistent strategic The rate of contribution to POS may vary and land use based on demographic h) Specify any anticipated percentage
approach to the planning, provision to accommodate localised situations and forecasts, including household size, and rationale for POS contributions
and documentation of POS. the new demand being generated, in at the suburb or appropriate precinct from non-residential or rural living land
accordance with this policy. area scale; uses; and
d) Support the provision of POS in non-
residential or rural living areas, where c) Identification of any current or likely i) Identification of land around existing
6.2 Calculating and Designing
justified by site-specific and relevant future under provision of POS land or proposed POS suited for increased
Public Open Space
considerations. and facilities, based in the first instance residential density to encourage
upon a minimum requirement of accessibility, surveillance and use of
e) Ensure that incidental land uses within POS is to be calculated and designed
10 per cent of the gross subdivisible POS.
POS, such as utilities, infrastructure in accordance with Liveable
area per suburb, and outline strategies
or biodiversity conservation, Neighbourhoods. Some local governments may opt to use
for obtaining more land or upgrading
complement, or otherwise not Public utilities or infrastructure are to be existing POS and/or Regional Open more detailed POS demand analyses, or
compromise POS function provided located so as not to compromise the Space; similar, to inform their strategies.
for the community. function of the POS and generally do not If such additional studies are prepared,
f) Prevent the unplanned loss of existing form part of the 10 per cent POS area. d) Identification of any existing POS or the planning components should be
POS areas through rezoning or other open space reserves suitable for incorporated into the local planning
disposal. 6.3 Strategic Planning upgrades using cash in lieu funds, and strategy.
the broad nature of those upgrades
POS location, area, distribution and
6.3.1 Local Planning Strategies and what additional functionality
function are to be guided by the
could be gained;
6. Policy measures Local planning strategies are important local planning strategy, Liveable
for identifying community POS needs e) Identification of opportunities for Neighbourhoods and any other applicable
and providing a strategic basis for enhancing access to, and connectivity WAPC policy. In the absence of an
6.1 General Measures
localised decision-making, including POS of, POS such as landscaping local road adequate local planning strategy, POS
Proposals to create additional lots are contribution rates. reserves and pedestrian accessways; should be provided and contributed to in
to be assessed against this policy to f) Identification of land surrounding accordance with Liveable Neighbourhoods
To assist with POS planning, local planning
determine the appropriate provision of, existing or proposed POS suitable for and this policy and ensure an appropriate
strategies should include:
and contribution towards, POS. an increase in residential density to mix of local, neighbourhood and district
a) Inventory of POS reserves and other further encourage accessibility and open space for the community’s sport,
In general, a minimum of 10 per cent of
public reserves with a public open use of POS and assist in achieving infill health, amenity, recreation and nature
the gross subdivisible area shall be for POS
space function. This may include density targets; needs.
for community use across all urban areas.
foreshore reserves, regional open
The POS provision should be guided by g) Rationale for any local variations to 6.3.2 Structure Plans
space, public school ovals and
strategic planning and implemented in standard POS contributions, including
environmental conservation reserves
Structure plans are to consider any existing
statutory decision-making through POS the recommended POS contribution,
with POS functions;
POS and assess the need for new POS
contributions from new subdivision. premised on the above analysis;
b) Demand and supply analysis, to meet current and anticipated future
identifying existing and projected POS community needs.
functionality alongside population,

Position Statement: 3
Public Open Space
19 December 2025
Structure plans should refer to the 6.4.2 Subdivision General In instances of variations to the 10 per cent
anticipated POS contributions (land and/or minimum standard, consideration shall
All subdivision regardless of type (green
cash in lieu) to be provided at subdivision also be given to:
title, all strata title and community scheme)
stage and how these contributions will
will be considered for the provision of POS a) the objectives and requirements
assist in ensuring adequate extent, quality,
as a standard infrastructure requirement as of other WAPC policies as may be
function and distribution of POS within the
part of the application assessment. applicable;
plan area.
In accordance with the Planning and b) advice of the local government as may
Any staging of POS provision is to be
Development Act 2005, a condition of be sought by the WAPC; and
outlined at the structure plan stage.
subdivision approval may be imposed that
c) any approved or applicable density
requires a contribution to POS as land or
6.4 Statutory Planning or development bonus entitlement
cash in lieu, or combination thereof.
which may require further
6.4.1 Local Planning Schemes In some circumstances requiring land consideration of POS requirements.
for POS may not be practical, may be Depending on the scale of the bonus,
When zoning for new residential land,
otherwise planned for in a local planning this may negate a variation to the full
the minimum of 10 per cent of the gross
strategy, scheme or structure plan, or 10 per cent contribution or trigger
subdivisible area should be planned for
there may already be sufficient POS in the assessment as an infill proposal.
POS as land, unless otherwise justified and
suburb or locality for the community’s
prescribed in an approved local planning
POS land needs. In such circumstances,
strategy.
contribution to POS via cash in lieu of
Scheme amendments that propose land may be applied as a condition of
increased residential densities or affect POS subdivision approval. The WAPC will
provision, must be supported by a local seek advice from the local government
planning strategy. The strategy should regarding the imposition of such a
identify current and future community POS condition.
needs and anticipated contributors to POS
6.4.3 Residential Subdivision
(as land or cash in lieu). In the absence of
a local planning strategy that adequately For all residential subdivisions (including
addresses POS, a scheme amendment may green title, all types of strata subdivision
be required to include its own strategic and community title), a minimum standard
analysis of the community’s POS needs to of 10 per cent of the gross subdivisible
inform POS provision and contributions. area is to be ceded free of cost for POS, or
the equivalent cash in lieu, unless varied in
Local planning schemes are to depict
one of the following situations.
POS in accordance with the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015.

Position Statement: 4
Public Open Space
19 December 2025
Established Suburbs (Infill) Table 1: Infill Contributions
Existing POS in an established or
establishing suburb provides some of the Applies during deferral period for two Applies from 19 December 2027 onwards
POS function for the existing community years from 19 December 2025 to 18 (post two 2 year period)
December 2027
and therefore typically justifies a reduced
POS contribution from new infill
a) Infill subdivision comprising any number a) Infill subdivision comprising 5 lots or less including ‘built strata’ subdivision are not
subdivision as outlined below.
of lots may reduce the POS contribution required to contribute to POS unless justified through a local planning strategy or
In cases where a subdivision or to a default 0 per cent of the gross local planning scheme.
subdivisible area unless already required
re-subdivision is proposed at the same b) Infill subdivision comprising 6 lots or more may reduce the POS contribution to:
under the local planning scheme.
density as when the locality’s 10 per cent
• 5 per cent of the gross subdivisible area, with the contribution being no more
POS requirement was initially assessed and
than the equivalent of $4,000 per lot where the subdivision is in a locality
contributed to, it is not considered “infill” identified by the local government as having less than 10 per cent POS,
and would not typically be expected to
• 2 per cent of the gross subdivisible area, with the contribution being no more
contribute again. This scenario is akin to
than the equivalent of $1,600 per lot where the subdivision is in a locality
staging of subdivision.
identified by the local government as having 10 per cent or more POS,
Brownfield subdivision is not considered • 2.5 per cent of the gross subdivisible area, with the contribution being no more
infill (for the purpose of this policy) and is than the equivalent of $2,000 per lot where the strata subdivision includes
not included in this variation. Brownfield communal open space with a POS function in excess of any Residential Design
sites do not typically contain POS and will Code communal open space area requirements,
be assessed under the same provisions as unless justified and varied through a local planning strategy, local planning
greenfield subdivision, unless otherwise scheme or structure plan.
determined through the local planning
c) Applications to subdivide a building (‘built strata’) into 6 lots or more, which has
strategy or structure plan.
been constructed in accordance with a development approval issued on or before
19 December 2029 are not required to contribute to POS where the subdivision is
approved on or before 19 December 2033.

Position Statement: 5
Public Open Space
19 December 2025
Mixed Use Sites Infill:
Mixed use sites include both residential
Table 2: Contribution Rates for Mixed Use Infill
and non-residential land uses. Mixed use
sites shall contribute to the minimum
applicable POS requirement generally in Applies during deferral period for two
Applies from 19 December 2027 onwards
proportion to the residential component years from 19 December 2025 to 18
(post two year period)
December 2027
of the mixed use site.
If the residential composition of a Established suburbs (infill) Established suburbs (infill)
mixed use site is not yet determined,
For new mixed use infill subdivision, a a) Where the mixed use lot is an infill site:
use the following method to estimate default 0 per cent contribution applies
• 5 per cent of the site area, with the contribution being no more than the
the residential composition for POS to the mixed use site area unless already
equivalent of $4,000 per residential lot where the subdivision is in a locality
calculations: required under the local planning
identified by the local government as having less than 10 per cent POS,
scheme.
Greenfield/Brownfield:
• 2 per cent of the site area, with the contribution being no more than the
a) where the mixed use lot is identified in equivalent of $1,600 per residential lot where the subdivision is in a locality
identified by the local government as having 10 per cent or more POS,
a local planning scheme or structure
plan for residential development at • 2.5 per cent of the site area, with the contribution being no more than the
a density of up to and including R80 equivalent of $2,000 per residential lot where the strata subdivision includes
or R-AC4, or in the absence of an communal open space with a POS function in excess of any Residential
applicable R Code, to a maximum Design Code communal open space area requirements,
height of 3 storeys, a minimum 5 per unless justified and varied through a local planning strategy, local planning
cent POS contribution applies to the scheme or structure plan.
total mixed use site area, unless varied
b) Applications to subdivide a building (‘built strata’) into 6 lots or more, which
in accordance with the local planning
has been constructed in accordance with a development approval issued on
scheme, strategy or structure plan; or
or before 19 December 2029 are not required to contribute to POS where the
b) where the mixed use lot is identified in subdivision is approved on or before 19 December 2033.
a local planning scheme or structure
plan for residential development at a
density exceeding the R80 or R-AC4
density, a minimum 7.5 per cent
POS contribution applies to the total
mixed use site area, unless varied in
accordance with the local planning
scheme, local planning strategy or
structure plan.

Position Statement: 6
Public Open Space
19 December 2025
Regional Residential Subdivision existing and predicted population c) any objectives and requirements of 6.6 Development Applications
and land use, utilising demographic other planning instruments as may be
In recognition of the climatic,
For development approvals that precede
forecasts, and ideally on a suburb basis. applicable; and
environmental, cultural and lifestyle
subdivision, an assessment of POS needs
differences across the State, regional The use of a townsite boundary, statistical d) the advice of the local government. should be undertaken in accordance with
areas may be allowed a variation to the
area or locality may be more applicable this policy. Following the assessment,
minimum 10 per cent POS contribution.
than suburb boundary in some regional 6.5 Staging where justified, an advice note should be
This variation is contingent upon a
locations. included on the development approval
strategic analysis conducted through In staged subdivisions, POS may be to alert proponents to a potential future
an approved local planning strategy, 6.4.4 Non-Residential and Rural required to be provided entirely from POS contribution at the subdivision stage.
local planning scheme, or structure plan. Living Subdivision the first stage, especially if an agreement, Deferral periods noted in the Position
The analysis must identify satisfactory such as an approved structure plan, Statement will still apply.
A POS contribution of any amount, as land
developed POS and other open space has not been reached with other
or cash in lieu, may be sought from non-
that fulfil a local POS function (such as residential land uses (includes commercial, landowners regarding the sharing of POS 6.7 Development of Public
foreshore reserves, regional open space responsibilities.
industrial or tourism) or for rural living land Open Space
or community purpose sites) to meet the
uses (includes rural residential) for the If POS is not fully provided in the first
recreation, sport and nature needs of the The requirement for POS land to be
purposes of catering for residents, worker stage of subdivision, the staged rate
community, and justify the POS variation provided as a condition of subdivision
or visitor needs, general amenity or site of POS provision may be required to
accordingly. may include the development of that
specific requirements. The justification for, equal or exceed 10 per cent of the gross
POS. Where POS is to be ceded free of
As a minimum, the strategic analysis is to and amount of POS contribution, is to be subdivisible area for that stage with
cost by the subdivider, it is a requirement
include: informed by: POS for all remaining stages outlined
that the entire POS be developed
a) an inventory of POS reserves in the a) a strategic analysis, as contained in in a staging plan, to ensure the quality,
to a minimum ‘basic development’
suburb and adjoining suburbs; an approved local planning strategy, quantity and location of POS adequately
standard in accordance with Liveable
scheme, or structure plan identifying caters for residents at each stage of lot
b) identification of other open space the nexus between the land use/ creation. Neighbourhoods, unless otherwise agreed
reserves that currently offer a POS by the WAPC and local government, and
development and the additional
function in the suburb and adjoining If an infill residential subdivision is not maintained for a minimum period of time.
population/visitation/workforce
suburbs, if applicable. This may formally identified as being staged but an This requirement does not extend to cash
demand for POS provision or
include foreshore reserves and other application is made that results in a lower in lieu conditions.
contribution;
yield than is possible within the gross
public purpose reserves developed
Development of the POS beyond
with a POS function; and b) the suitability of the proposed POS as subdivisible area, and it is likely that further
the standards outlined in SPP 3.6 and
it relates to the non-residential or rural subdivision could occur in subsequent
c) a broad POS demand and supply living land use needs, or the suitability stages, the WAPC may use its discretion Liveable Neighbourhoods is a matter
analysis, identifying existing and of existing POS where cash in lieu is to determine a POS contribution. In such for negotiation with the relevant
projected POS quantity, accessibility intended to be spent; cases, a POS contribution may be required local government to ensure the POS
and functionality alongside the for applications of 5 lots or less. development reflects the community
needs and local government management

Position Statement: 7
Public Open Space
19 December 2025
capacities. An additional management account, separate to other reserve reserved in the local planning scheme cash in lieu contributions were sourced
agreement with the local government may accounts, established and maintained for POS or other reserve with a from within the suburb, adjoining
be required to be entered into in these under section 6.11 of the Local recreation function; and suburb or locality; or
circumstances. Government Act 1995. The account is to
d) occur within the suburb, adjoining e) improvements to, or development
set out the purpose for which the money
suburb or locality, in which it was of, regional open space, foreshore
6.8 Cash in lieu collection and is held, the landholding from which it was
collected unless variations are reserves and/or environmental
management obtained and the date on which it was
identified in an approved local conservation reserves where it is
paid to the local government.
planning strategy. demonstrated that the reserve offers
In accordance with Section 153 of the
The total amount of cash in lieu funds a POS function, has unrestricted
Planning and Development Act 2005,
collected, held and expended, ideally per 6.9.2 Cash in lieu use public access and the cash in lieu
the WAPC can impose a condition of
suburb, in the reserve account should contributions were sourced from
subdivision requiring POS to be provided Cash in lieu funds can be used for:
be made publicly available to ensure within the suburb, adjoining suburbs
as cash in lieu of setting aside a portion
transparency and accountability to the a) the purchase of land for POS by the or locality. Such improvements or
of land. Section 155 of the Planning and
community. local government. This can include development for POS functions should
Development Act 2005 sets out provisions
the local government’s administrative be consistent with the purpose of the
in relation to valuation of land. The
6.9 Cash in lieu expenditure costs associated with the purchase reserve.
value of cash in lieu is determined as a
process or repaying loans for the
percentage of the market value of the 6.9.1 Cash in lieu intent purchase; Cash in lieu funds would not normally
parent lot from which the subdivision be acceptable for indoor or enclosed
occurs. The percentage relates to the To address the nexus between POS b) reimbursing an owner of land that is recreation facilities where usage fees
equivalent percentage of land that would demand generation and POS provision part of an agreement for the setting are charged, nor for maintenance or
otherwise be provided as POS. and upgrade, expenditure of cash in lieu aside or vesting of land for POS in infrastructure upgrades unrelated to
should: accordance with the Planning and
The local government will, at the expense community POS needs.
Development Act 2005;
of the subdivider, seek a valuation of the a) be informed by an approved local In all instances, expenditure of cash in lieu
land from the Valuer General’s Office or a planning strategy, or in the absence of c) improvements to, or development of, should aim to be utilised in a timely and
licensed valuer. If the valuation is disputed a local planning strategy, an alternative POS; efficient manner.
by the subdivider or local government, strategy, policy or plan that has been
d) improvements to, or development
the valuation may be varied by agreement through public consultation; 6.9.3 Expenditure requests
of, public reserves that have a
between the parties or arbitrated in
b) respond to community need such recreation function provided the land Requests to expend cash in lieu, other than
accordance with Section 156 of the
as improving access, health, safety, is reserved for a form of recreation for the purchase of land for POS, are to be
Planning and Development Act 2005.
environmentally sensitive design or purposes including POS recreation or submitted to the WAPC prior to Ministerial
Section 154(1) of the Planning and contemporary functionality of the public purpose reserves in the local consideration, with the accompanying
Development Act 2005 provides that expenditure site; government local planning scheme, information:
cash in lieu funds received by a local the public has unrestricted access and
c) be on a site that has unrestricted a) a cover letter briefly justifying the
government must be paid into a reserve
public access, not generally be request from the local government,
associated with a use fee, and is addressing the above requirements,

Position Statement: 8
Public Open Space
19 December 2025
this may be in the form of referencing However, where a local government areas of POS. Proposals for the disposal 6.12 Other Open Space
the local planning strategy as determines that an existing POS of any POS land which has been given
Regional open space, foreshore reserves,
applicable; area unsuitable in location, size or up under the Planning and Development
community purpose sites, Bush Forever
function, does not meet current or Act 2005 will be referred to the WAPC for
b) a plan or list outlining the source(s) sites or conservation reserves are not by
future community needs, POS disposal consideration.
and amount(s) of the funds (includes definition in this policy considered POS.
or reclassification may be considered.
suburb, subdivision reference number However, they may contribute a POS
This will be assessed in the same strategic 6.11 Reservation, Management
from which funds were obtained, date function for the local community and may
manner as determining POS provision. and Vesting of Public Open
obtained and the dollar value of the receive consideration in strategic planning
Space
contribution); Preferably, the local planning strategy as providing POS functionality. These
c) project or program timing schedule for should guide disposal proposals. Where land for POS has been created forms of other open space may influence
expenditure; and In the absence of a strategy, a site specific under the Planning and Development the determination of the gross subdivisible
strategic assessment will be required area and in some instances may be
Act 2005 and reserved for that purpose,
d) project or program expenditure based which shall include: included as justification for a reduction
that land is only to be used for public
on a maximum budget allocation.
a) the current accessibility, interface, recreational purposes and is to remain (or credit towards) the minimum 10 per
Expenditure requests can be grouped into physical attributes, function and open to the public at all times. It is to be cent POS requirement in the manner
one consolidated map and schedule that estimated visitation of the reserve; reserved in the local planning scheme for outlined in Liveable Neighbourhoods.
includes the above information. Grouped b) any planning in the suburb which may POS. Foreshore reserve provision is in addition
requests will require notification to the increase residential populations and Where POS sites are impacted upon by to POS requirements. The width, function
WAPC within three months of completion the need for additional POS quantity or utilities, easements, buffers, environmental and design of foreshore reserves are
of the works, including a signed statement quality; constraints, or are shared use sites such determined in accordance with State
demonstrating details of expenditure from Planning Policy.
as those co-located with school sites,
a Certified Public Accountant employed c) the distribution and amount of existing
the management responsibilities of the
by the local government or an audited POS in the suburb as reflected as a
POS are to be resolved at the structure
statement prior to the publication of the percentage of the gross subdivisible
planning stage, or prior to subdivision
local government annual report. area; and
approval, as may be applicable and
d) evidence of local community practical. If management responsibilities
6.10 Disposal or Reclassification engagement. of the POS are unable to be resolved, the
of Public Open Space
WAPC may not support the subdivision
The disposal of land set aside as a
until the proponent supplies evidence
The WAPC generally does not support the Crown reserve for public recreation is
of resolution of a suitable management
disposal or rezoning of POS reserves, as governed by the Land Administration Act
arrangement.
future community needs can be difficult to 1997. Proceeds from the sale of public
anticipate. recreation reserves may be used by the
local government to acquire other land for
POS or be spent on upgrades to existing

Position Statement: 9
Public Open Space
19 December 2025
7. Definitions/Terms Locality: a spatial term used in land use
planning to describe a local area. The
Brownfield: larger scale sites in size and attributes of a locality can vary
established areas that are often, but depending upon the context and intended
not limited to, land that may have been application. For this reason, a locality is
converted from a former land use to not specifically defined but rather can
another. be determined in a similar manner to
a precinct in accordance with SPP 7.2.
Built Strata: a colloquial term for a
In POS planning, the starting point for
strata scheme under the Strata Titles Act
identifying a locality is the suburb area,
1985. Further information is available in
modified in consideration of walkable
the WAPC Fact Sheet Strata – Form 15
catchments and relevant local features.
Applications.
Public Open Space: land that is set aside,
Demand analysis: understanding
used as, and managed for public recreation
the demand created by anticipated
purposes and reserved for public open
future population helps to justify POS
space in a local planning scheme.
contributions. Demand for POS in yet
to be developed areas or established Regional Areas: generally interpreted as
areas can be assessed based on the likely areas and country towns located outside of
numbers of dwellings or subdivision yields metropolitan and major regional centres.
to be achieved in an area. Latent demand
Regional Open Space: land that is
is often assessed by projecting future
designated as Parks and Recreation or
participation, using existing participation
Regional Open Space in a region planning
rates, such as organised sporting activities,
scheme.
and applying this to projected population
figures. Strata: all types of strata under the Strata
Titles Act 1985, including ‘built strata’ and
Greenfield: undeveloped land that has
‘vacant strata’, as well as leasehold strata
been identified for future urban use.
and survey strata under the Planning and
Gross Subdivisible Area: as set out in Development Act 2005.
Liveable Neighbourhoods.
Infill: is the redevelopment of existing
urban areas at a higher density than
currently exists.