RISELEY
ACTIVITY CENTRE
STRUCTURE PLAN
MAJRUCLHY 22001154

Table of Modifications
Modification No. Summary of Modification Date Adopted by Council
1 Inclusion of No. 745 Canning Highway, Ardross within 5 March 2015
the Structure Plan Area.
2 Text updates to Clauses 9.24.3, 10.5, 10.14, 10.24 and 5 March 2015
10.35.

RISELEY
ACTIVITY CENTRE
STRUCTURE PLAN
MARCH 2015
JULY 2014

Record of Endorsement
CERTIFIED THAT THIS STRUCTURE PLAN WAS ADOPTED BY THE RESOLUTION OF THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MELVILLE ON 17
JUNE 2014.
And
PURSUANT TO THE COUNCIL’S RESOLUTION HEREUNTO AFFIXED IN THE PRESENCE OF:
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
Mayor Russell Aubrey
CITY OF MELVILLE
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………....
Chief Executive Officer - Dr Shayne Silcox
CITY OF MELVILLE
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. Date
This Structure Plan is prepared under the provisions of the City of Melville Community Planning Scheme No.5.
Note – The Western Australian Planning Commission is not required to formally endorse this Structure Plan in accordance with Table 6 of State
Planning Policy 4.2 – Activity Centres for Perth and Peel
iv

Contents
Part One: Statutory Section 1 4. Activity 31
4.1 Policy Goals 31
1. Structure Plan Area 2
4.2 Land Uses and Diversity 31
2. Structure Plan Content 2 4.3 Employment 34
4.4 Dwellings and Population 35
3. Interpretations and Relationships with the Scheme 2
5. Urban Form 36
4. Operation 2
5.1 Urban Form and Structure 36
5.2 Built Form Character 38
5. General Centre Objectives 2
5.3 Built Form Requirements 38
6. Structure Plan 2 5.4 Public Spaces 45
6. Resource Conservation 48
7. Land Use Permissibility 4
6.1 Energy Conservation 48
8. Retail Land Uses and Floorspace 5
6.2 Water Resources and Management 48
9. Minimum Development Standards for Structure Plan Area 5 7. Implementation 49
7.1 Statutory Planning Context 49
10. Development Standards for Precincts 7
7.2 Governance, Collaboration and Incentives 49
Part Two: Non-Statutory (Explanatory) Section 9 7.3 Further Studies and Investigations 49
7.4 Monitoring and Review 50
1. Background 11
7.5 Priority Actions 51
1.1 Introduction and Purpose 11
Appendix A: Economic, Retail and Employment Report
1.2 Summary of Consultation Process and Outcomes 11
1.3 Centre Concept, Vision and Objectives 14
Appendix B: Parking and Access Strategy
2. Centre Context and Background 15
2.1 Land Description 15
2.2 Planning Framework 16
2.3 Site Conditions 21
3. Movement 22
3.1 Regional Connections 22
3.2 Principal Public Transport Services 22
3.3 Local Road Network and Access 23
3.4 Pedestrian and Cycling Movement and Amenity 25
3.5 Parking Strategy and Travel Management 27
3.6 Streetscape 30
RISELEY ACTIVITY CENTRE STRUCTURE PLAN v

Executive Summary
The Riseley Activity Centre Structure Plan has been prepared by the City of Key Benefits and Features of the Structure Activity
Melville (the City) to support the future revitalisation and growth of the Riseley
Activity Centre as a District Centre in line with urban outcomes envisaged Plan Increase activity levels day and night throughout the centre by;
within the State Government’s high level spatial framework and strategic plan
Directions 2031 and Beyond. Movement • Increased land use diversity, providing a range of retail, dining,
entertainment, office, residential and community offerings to support an
• Improve pedestrian safety and comfort within the street environment
increased number of residents, workers and visitors, this will enhance the
This structure plan responds to the growth challenges facing the City,
through:
overall vibrancy of the centre.
including a steadily increasing population, an aging population, the need
for a range of housing choices and the impacts this growth will have on the - Intersection upgrades (Riseley Street/Canning Highway and • Provision of enhanced levels of convenience retail such as quality
environment. This structure plan demonstrates the City’s regard for the need Riseley Street/Kearns Crescent) and improved pedestrian crossing
supermarkets, butchers, bakers and hairdressers to cater for the daily
to proactively plan for the future and guide change that is in the best interest opportunities at the intersection of Willcock Street, Coogee Road and
needs of residents and maximise competition with surrounding centres
of it’s community. Simpson Street; by differentiating the offer provided by providing unique consumer goods
and services and a high amenity-shopping environment.
- Provision of on street car parking along eastern edge of Riseley
The purpose of the Riseley Activity Centre Structure Plan is to set out a clear
vision for the future development of the Riseley Activity Centre. By way of its Street to provide a buffer between traffic and assist in activating • Increases in population driven offices (eg: real estate agents,
business frontages;
implementation, it is intended for this document to act as a catalyst for both accountants, dentists and general practitioners) to enable more residents
private sector and government revitalisation and development, benefitting to work locally and cater for growth within the centre and City generally.
- Reducing vehicular speeds along portions of Riseley Street to 40
its visitors, businesses and residents within and surrounding the centre by
kilometres per hour and Kearns Crescent to 30 kilometres per hour; • Increases in the portion of entertainment activities such as full service
providing an improved level of amenity, activity and diversity of housing
gym, small bars, community and functions centres and sporting facilities,
choice and employment. - Providing parking in a format that maintains streetscape quality and
making it an premier entertainment destination.
accessibility; and
The key objectives for the Riseley Activity Centre, which form the basis of this • An additional 133 dwellings by 2021 and an additional 300 dwellings
- Improve footpath provision for improved accessibility.
structure plan are to: by 2031.
• Improve the visual quality, comfort and safety of access and parking
• Create an attractive and sustainable activity centre that is a vibrant, through the preparation of a detailed Parking Management Plan for Urban Form
desirable and safe place to live, work and socialise;
the Riseley Centre that provides a holistic approach to the provision
• Encourage the development of following five distinct character precincts:
and management of parking within the centre to support its viability,
• Facilitate viable, enduring and high quality development in the activity
functionality, safety, amenity and enjoyment.
centre with an appropriate mix of land uses; - Precinct 1 Riseley Core: The Riseley Core is a pedestrian-scaled,
vibrant, mixed use area with a boulevard character. Commercial,
• Encourage higher use of alternative transportation modes through the
• Enhance the character, streetscapes and public spaces in the activity entertainment and retail uses are envisaged on the ground floor to
provision of greater bicycle storage and post trip cycling facilities and
centre; service the local community and visitors. Residential dwellings and
new taxi bays in the Centre.
commercial uses are envisaged on upper levels of buildings.
• Appropriately manage traffic, parking and accessibility issues;
• Provision of more on-street car parking on Simpson Street and Willcock
- Precinct 2 Canning Corridor: The Canning Corridor has a high
• Promote a mix of housing choices; Street to encourage slower movement of vehicles through ‘edge friction’.
exposure to passing traffic. Commercial, showroom and retail uses
• Encourage local employment and business opportunities; and • Cater for the individual parking needs of developments (employee and are envisaged on the ground floor, with offices and residential uses
visitor parking) by encouraging future developments to provide stacked on the upper levels of buildings.
• Provide certainty to enable investment decisions to be made with or basement parking.
- Precinct 3 The Crescent: The Crescent is the vibrant heart of the
reasonable confidence.
• Encouraging all-day staff car parking in existing car bays on Mitchell activity centre with a variety of fine-grained shops and entertainment
This structure plan recognises that urban revitalisation is an ongoing Street to reduce pressure on prime car parking locations within the activities on the ground floor. Residential dwellings and commercial
process that requires resourcing and investment from both government centre and provide greater access to customer parking. uses are envisaged on upper levels of buildings. The Precinct
and private sources. The role of this structure plan is twofold. Firstly, it sets provides the opportunity to live, work and play in an exciting, urban
out acceptable development parameters within the centre. Secondly it is • Redesign Kearns Crescent by realigning the carriage way, providing place.
parking and pedestrian paths on both sides of the road and potentially
intended to act as a catalyst to the revitalisation of the Riseley Activity Centre,
introducing a slow moving surface to enhance traffic safety, pedestrian - Precinct 4 Transitional Frame: The Transitional Frame provides for the
creating fresh opportunities for transformation and encouraging investment.
and cyclist accessibility and improve place making opportunities to the incremental expansion of the activity centre over time. The precinct
benefit of local business and current and future residents. is anticipated to change from a predominately residential area to also
include compatible commercial uses. A key feature of the precinct is
• Formalise laneways and progressively widen to improve permeability of adaptability, where buildings can be used for different uses over time.
the precinct and potentially create new business opportunities.
vi

- Precinct 5 Residential Frame: The Residential Frame is intended to Implementation
remain as a predominately residential area and provides for medium
to high density residential development. Given its location next to a This structure plan provides the statutory planning framework for the
busy activity centre, the amenity of the precinct will be different to the Riseley Activity Centre. However the structure plan does not automatically
amenity found in suburban residential areas. change the underlying zoning of the centre. The City will therefore need to
prepare, publicly advertise and seek approval from the Western Australian
- The distribution of building heights throughout the precinct to allow
Planning Commission for any amendments to the current zonings of the
heights up to six storeys in areas of existing commercial and retail
area recommended by the structure plan. This will be done as a high priority
intensity, transitioning to lower heights adjacent to lower scale
following the approval of the structure plan.
residential areas.
• Within areas of a commercial focus, the provision of active frontages at
ground level that is conducive to facilitating high levels of interaction
between the interior of the shop and the street.
• Within the Canning Highway Corridor where only semi-active edges are
proposed, these shall consist of soft landscaped setback areas and
large windows and building entrances overlooking and accessible from
the street.
• Articulation of building form to create interesting facades and upper level
setbacks that reduce the sense of closeness to the public realm and
neighbouring properties.
• Public realm improvements to assist with improving the qualities of
streets and public places, and provide comfort to pedestrians and
confidence to businesses that the street is a valuable aspect for
customer arrival and interaction.
• Provision of continuous awnings along all commercially oriented streets
provide appropriate pedestrian shade and shelter.
• Improved thermal and environmental performance of buildings to reduce
energy and water consumption of developments.
• Enhance the visual enhancement of the centre and it’s level of usability
through the provision of street furnishing, public art, lighting, paving,
defined parking, cohesive street tree planting and landscaping.
• Enhance the character and enjoyment of the defined public spaces
that are situated within the centre including the Riseley Heart (Kearns
Crescent), Gateway Plaza, Main Street, Parking Court, Pedestrian Links
and Leafy Street (Willcock and Simpson Streets).
Resource Conservation
• Promote the use of alterative transport modes through:
- Enhancing the Centre’s role as a shopping, employment and
residential node and therefore support public transport by
strengthening the Centre’s position and increasing ridership as a
public transport origin and destination; and
- Improving the pedestrian qualities within the centre, provisions for
cycling as well as pedestrian connections within a 200 metres radius
of the centre will encourage those within proximity to the centre to
undertake fewer vehicle based trips.
• Promote sustainable construction and waste practices and the
preparation of waste management plan for all future developments.
• Promote onsite stormwater management.
RISELEY ACTIVITY CENTRE STRUCTURE PLAN vii

viii

Part One: Statutory Section

1. Structure Plan Area 3.5 The following design elements of the Residential Design Codes do 5. General Centre
not apply within the structure plan area unless otherwise specified:
3.5.1 Housing Density Requirements; Objectives
This structure plan shall apply to the Riseley Activity Centre in Applecross
3.5.2 Site Coverage;
and Ardross, being the land contained within the inner edge of the line
denoting the structure plan boundary in Plan 1: Structure Plan Map.
3.5.3 Plot Ratio; The general objectives for the Riseley Activity Centre are to:
3.5.4 Open Space and Landscaping Requirements; and 5.1 Create an attractive and sustainable activity centre that is a vibrant,
2. Structure Plan desirable and safe place to live, work and socialise;
3.5.6 Building Height Requirements.
5.2 Facilitate viable, enduring and high quality development in the activity
Content 3.6 Any other provision, standard or requirement of Part One of the
centre with an appropriate mix of land uses;
structure plan that is not otherwise contained in the Scheme, shall
apply to the structure plan area as though it is incorporated into the 5.3 Enhance the character, streetscapes and public spaces in the activity
Scheme, and shall be binding and enforceable to the same extent as centre;
This structure plan comprises:
if part of the Scheme.
5.4 Appropriately manage traffic, parking and accessibility issues;
2.1 Part One - Statutory section. This section contains the structure plan 3.7 Part Two of this structure plan and all appendices are to be used as a
map and statutory planning provisions and requirements. reference only to clarify and guide interpretation and implementation 5.5 Promote a range of housing choices for the local area;
of Part One.
2.2 Part Two – Non-statutory (explanatory) section. This section to be 5.6 Encourage local employment and business opportunities; and
used as a reference guide to interpret and justify the implementation 3.8 Building heights are measured in storeys in this structure plan. A
of Part One. storey is defined as follows in this structure plan: 5.7 Provide certainty to enable investment decisions to be made with
reasonable confidence.
2.3 Appendices – Technical reports and supporting plans and maps. The space between the floor and ceiling of a building which
constitutes a floor or level capable of use for human habitation, but
does not include: 6. Structure Plan
3. Interpretations and
a) any floor of a building having 50% or more of its volume located
below natural ground level; and
Relationships with the
6.1 The structure plan area is divided into five precincts as shown in
b) roof structures of a high quality design that reduce the visual Figure 1: Structure Plan Map:
Scheme impact of lift plant and other similar utility or services, not
exceeding 3.0 metres in height; and 6.1.1 Precinct 1 - Riseley Core;
c) unenclosed roof structures of a high quality design that provide 6.1.2 Precinct 2 - Canning Corridor;
3.1 Unless otherwise specified in this part, the words and expressions weather protection to areas used for private or communal open
6.1.3 Precinct 3 - The Crescent;
used in this structure plan shall have the respective meanings given space, not exceeding 3.0 metres in height.
to them in the City of Melville Community Planning Scheme No.5 (the
6.1.4 Precinct 4 - Transitional Frame;
Scheme) including any amendments gazetted thereto. Note: For the purposes of this definition, a mezzanine is considered to
constitute a storey.
6.1.5 Precinct 5 - Residential Frame.
3.2 The structure plan map (Plan 1) outlines land use, zones and
reserves applicable within the structure plan area. The zones and 6.2 New development in the structure plan area is required to satisfy the
reserves designated under this structure plan apply to the land within 4. Operation Minimum Development Requirements specified in Parts 9 and 10.
it as if the zones and reserves were incorporated into the Scheme.
3.3 Pursuant to Part 4 of the Scheme: the provisions, standards and
requirements specified under Part One of this Structure Plan shall This structure plan shall come into operation on the day it is endorsed by the
have the same force and effect as if it were a provision, standard or Council of the City of Melville.
requirement of the Scheme.
3.4 Provisions contained in Sections 3, 7, 8, 9 and 10 are intended
to vary the Scheme. In the event of there being any variations or
conflict between these provisions, standards or requirements and
the provisions, standards or requirements of the Scheme, then the
provisions, standards or requirements of this structure plan shall
prevail. In respect to all other matters the Scheme prevails over a
structure plan in the event of any inconsistency between them.
2

RISELEY CENTRE STRUCTURE PLAN MAP (PLAN 1)
5
DISTRICT CENTRE
R50
Y
A
W
H
G
2 HI
G
N
NI
N
A
C
DISTRICT CENTRE
3
R-ACO
KEY
1 NT
Structure Plan Boundary RES
CE
Maximum Building Heights A
Y
NS
C
W R
A
3 storey maximum H KE
HI
G
3
REET
4 storey maximum
N
G
O N
ST
5 storey maximum
N
NI
4 SI
MPS
A
6 storey maximum C
R
Precincts IS
DISTRICT CENTREE
1 Precinct 1: Riseley Core L
E
2 Precinct 2: Canning Corridor WILLCOCK
STREET
R50 Y
S
T
3 Precinct 3: The Crescent R
E
4 Precinct 4: Transitional Frame E
T
5 Precinct 5: Residential Frame
Zoning and Residential Coding
Precincts 1,2 & 3: District Centre R-ACO
Precincts 4 & 5: District Centre R50
RISELEY ACTIVITY CENTRE STRUCTURE PLAN 3

7. Land Use
Permissibility
7.1 Land use permissibility for the structure plan area and the precincts is
to be in accordance with Table 1.
Table 1: Land Use Permissibility
USE CLASSES Precinct 1 Precinct 2 Precinct 3 Precinct 4 Precinct 5 USE CLASSES Precinct 1 Precinct 2 Precinct 3 Precinct 4 Precinct 5
Riseley Core Canning The Crescent Transitional Residential Riseley Core Canning The Crescent Transitional Residential
Corridor Frame Frame Corridor Frame Frame
Aged or Dependent Persons Dwelling P P P P P Industry - Service D D D D X
Auction Premises X X X X X Market P P P X X
Bed and Breakfast D D D D D Medical Centre P P P D D
Betting Agency D D D X X Motor Vehicle Repair X D X X X
Car Park D D D D D Motor Vehicle Wash D D D X X
Child Care Premises P P P D D Motor Vehicle Wrecking X X X X X
Cinema / Theatre P P P A X Motor Vehicle, Boat or Caravan Sales X X X X X
Civic Uses P P P P D Multiple Dwelling P P P P P
Community Purposes P P P P D Night Club A A A X X
Consulting Rooms P P P P D Office P P P P D
Convenience Store P P P D X Place of Public worship D D D D A
Educational Establishment P P P D D Reception Centre D D D D X
Exhibition Centre P P P D D Recreation – Private P P P D A
Family Day Care P P P P D Residential Building D D D D D
Fast Food Outlet P P D X X Restaurant / Cafe P P P D A
Funeral Parlour X A A A A Restricted Premises X X X X X
Garden Centre X X X A A Service Station X X X X X
Grouped Dwelling D D D P P Shop P P P D* X
Health Centre P P P D A Showroom D D D X X
Home Business D D D D D Single Bedroom Dwelling P P P P P
Home Occupation D D D D D Single House D D D P P
Home Office P P P P P Small Bar D D D X X
Home Store D D D D A Storage D D D X X
Hospital A A A A A Tavern A A A X X
Hotel D D D A X Telecommunications Infrastructure (TI) D D D A X
Industry - Cottage X X X D D Trade Display X X X X X
Industry - General X X X X X Veterinary Centre A A A X X
Industry - Hazardous X X X X X Warehouse X X X X X
Industry - Light X X X X X Other uses not listed above D D D D D
Industry - Noxious X X X X X
* Note – Precincts 1, 2 and 3 are intended to be the retail destinations for the centre. The
responsible authority would only consider ‘Shops’ in Precinct 4 – Transitional Frame if it is
satisfied that the proposal would meet with the objectives of this structure plan.
4

7.2 The symbols used in the cross reference in Table 1 have the following 8. Retail Land Uses and Facades and Frontages
meanings —
9.6 Development is to be of a high quality and all facades and frontages
‘P’ means that the use is permitted by the Scheme providing Floorspace shall be designed and finished with high quality materials and
the use complies with the finishes.
relevant development standards and the requirements of
the Scheme; 9.7 Building facades (including car park structures above ground level)
8.1 The retail floorspace limit specified in the Riseley Centre Precinct
shall be articulated, coloured and detailed to contribute positively to
(DC2) in Part 4 of the Scheme shall not apply.
‘D’ means that the use is not permitted unless the responsible the appearance of local streetscapes and adjoining properties.
authority has exercised its
8.2 Retail development and floorspace for the centre shall be in
discretion by granting planning approval; 9.8 Building facades and frontages should highlight a vertical emphasis
accordance with the City’s Local Commercial and Activity Centres
wherever possible to help break up the appearance of buildings. This
Strategy (or Local Commercial Strategy as appropriate), unless
‘A’ means that the use is not permitted unless the responsible can be achieved through the shape and placement of windows and
otherwise determined by the responsible authority.
authority has exercised its openings and the innovative use of building materials, colours and
discretion by granting planning approval after giving textures.
special notice in accordance with
the Scheme; 9. Minimum 9.9 Feature elements are strongly encouraged on building facades,
including (but not limited to) variations to colours and building
‘X’ means a use that is not permitted by the Scheme. Development materials, coloured or textured banding, banding, recesses,
ornamental details, gables, verandahs, balconies, pillars, awnings,
7.3 A change in land use is permitted without a requirement for planning
canopies and bay windows.
approval, where: Standards for
9.10 Extensive blank walls, facades and featureless glazing facing streets
7.3.1 the change is from a P use to another P use, where the use
Structure Plan Area or public spaces are not permitted.
complies with the relevant objectives and development
standards applicable under the Scheme and structure 9.11 Non-residential ground floor frontages facing public streets and/or
plan; public spaces are to generally be connected to provide a continuous
9.1 This structure plan has minimum (or mandatory) development urban edge. Continuous awnings shall also be provided to provide
7.3.2 the change is from a previously approved D or A use to a
standards that apply across the entire structure plan area unless shade and weather protection for pedestrians.
P use where the use complies with the relevant objectives
otherwise noted (Part 9). In addition, there are also development
and development standards applicable under the Scheme standards contained in Part 10 to guide future development in each 9.12 Service areas and car parking (except on-street) are to be
and structure plan; or precinct. predominately screened from public view.
7.3.3 the change is to an incidental use that does not change the 9.13 All development is to be designed to incorporate Crime Prevention
Urban Form
predominant use of the land, and complies with all of the Through Environmental Design principles and be generally in
relevant objectives and development standards applicable accordance with the Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design
9.2 Building heights shall be in accordance with the Structure Plan Map
under the Scheme and structure plan. of Buildings Local Planning Policy.
(Plan 1) and Part 10 unless otherwise varied by the responsible
authority.
7.3.4 There is no requirement for additional car parking to be 9.14 Development is to be constructed in such a manner as to ameliorate
provided if a change from a commercial or retail land use noise and vibration from the urban environment. The City may require
9.3 Residential housing density is as follows:
to another commercial or retail land use is proposed in an acoustic assessment report detailing the likely noise effects of the
Precincts 1, 2, 3 and 4 and no additional Net Lettable Area 9.3.1 Precincts 1, 2 and 3 - no maximum residential density development on its surroundings and/or external noise impacts on
(NLA) floorspace is proposed. future residential dwellings.
9.3.2 Precincts 4 and 5 - R50 density in accordance with the
7.3.5 Notwithstanding planning approval may be required for Residential Design Codes Signage
any building or other development work that is proposed,
pursuant to clause 7.1 of the Scheme. 9.4 Land in Precincts 1, 2 and 3 shall only be subdivided or strata titled 9.15 Signage shall utilise high quality materials and be unobtrusive,
following the completion of development built in accordance with elegant and complement building designs in accordance with
7.3.6 The proponent is required to advise the City of a change the objectives and standards of this structure plan. The responsible relevant policies.
of use that is permitted without a requirement for planning authority may only recommend approval in exception to the above
approval, in accordance with clause 7.3 above, for where the responsible authority is of the opinion that subdivision of
Residential Development in All Precincts
information purposes. the land would not prejudice the objectives and standards of this
structure plan. 9.16 A private terrace, balcony or courtyard that is connected to an
internal living space such as a lounge room or dining room is to be
Note – The City would like to see coordinated development occur in
provided at a minimum of 15 square metres per dwelling.
Precincts 1, 2 and 3. The further subdivision of land would make it
difficult to build larger, coordinated developments and achieve the 9.17 The minimum dimension (width or length) for a terrace, balcony or
objectives of this structure plan. courtyard is 3 metres.
9.5 There are no site cover, plot ratio or open space requirements
for development within the structure plan area unless otherwise
specified.
RISELEY ACTIVITY CENTRE STRUCTURE PLAN 5

Residential Development in Precincts 1, 2 and 3 Landscaping Road and Right of Way (Laneway) Widenings
9.18 The following elements apply in Precincts 1, 2 and 3 and are 9.25 Landscaping is to accord with an overall landscaping plan for the 9.38 Land reserved under the Metropolitan Region Scheme for the
assessed in accordance with the Residential Design Codes: site, which has been approved by the responsible authority. purpose of road widening (principally along Canning Highway) shall
be ceded to the Crown at the point of subdivision or development.
9.18.1 Street surveillance Note: Landscaped roof and/or wall areas may be considered as
landscaping provided that it is of a high quality and easily accessible 9.39 Lots adjacent to a right of way (laneway) shall cede free of cost any
9.18.2 Parking (roof) and/or visible (walls). proportionate share of land required to widen the right of way to 6.0
metres at the point of subdivision or development.
9.18.3 Design of car parking spaces
Resource Conservation
Note: It is a WAPC requirement for all rights of way to achieve a
9.18.4 Vehicular access
9.26 Unless otherwise approved through the preparation and approval minimum width of 6.0m. The widened portion of the right of way or
9.18.5 Stormwater management of a Local Water or Site Management Plan, all stormwater is to be street is to be granted free of cost to the Crown or the City of Melville
contained onsite. (depending on current ownership) and shown on the final deposited
9.18.6 Dwelling size (housing diversity) plan submitted for subdivision clearance.
9.27 Developments are to include appropriate energy and conservation
9.19 Visual privacy for other lots within Precincts 1, 2 and 3 in accordance measures. Example: A right of way has an existing width of 4.0 metres with lots
with the R-100 provisions contained in the Residential Design Codes. on either side. A requirement to cede 1.0 metre of each adjoining
9.28 Solar passive design principles should be considered in the detailed lot would be triggered if/when the adjoining lots are proposed to
9.20 Visual privacy to lots outside Precincts 1, 2 and 3 in accordance with design of buildings. be developed or subdivided. The City would not require land to be
the Residential Design Codes.
ceded if the adjoining lots are not proposed to be developed or
9.29 Building design should encourage water efficiency, wherever
subdivided or if only minor development is proposed consistent with
9.21 The design of buildings within Precincts 1, 2 and 3 should minimise possible.
the use of the land for a single residential dwelling (e.g. – dwelling
overshadowing in the middle of the day on public spaces and
extension, garage or shed proposal).
residential dwellings also located within Precincts 1, 2 and 3. 9.30 Unless otherwise agreed, developments should be in accordance
with the Energy Efficiency in Building Design Local Planning Policy.
9.22 The design of buildings within Precincts 1, 2 and 3 that overshadow Waste Management
lots outside Precincts 1, 2 and 3 are to be assessed in accordance Car Parking
9.40 Large Development Applications shall be accompanied by a suitable
with the Residential Design Codes.
Waste Management Plan to address how waste and recycling will be
9.31 On-site car parking is to be in accordance with an approved Parking
9.23 All other elements of the Residential Design Codes that are not stated Management Plan or local planning policy for the centre or otherwise managed on the site.
above do not apply in Precincts 1, 2 and 3. in accordance with the Scheme and Residential Design Codes.
Residential Development in Precincts 4 and 5 9.32 Basement car parking is strongly encouraged.
9.24 Residential development in Precincts 4 and 5 is assessed in Vehicular Access
accordance with the Residential Design Codes, the Scheme and
local planning policies, with the exception of: 9.33 Large Development Applications shall be accompanied by a suitable
Transport Plan that addresses: vehicle access to/from and around the
9.24.1 Site Coverage (there is no maximum site coverage) site, promotion of public transport, walking and cycling access and
freight deliveries/servicing.
9.24.2 Plot Ratio (there is no maximum plot ratio. Built form is
controlled through building heights and setbacks) 9.34 Vehicular access to new developments abutting Canning Highway
is encouraged from the rear. Access via Canning Highway will
9.24.3 Open Space and Landscaping Requirements (controlled by
not generally be approved unless appropriate justification can be
clause 9.25 below)
provided to the satisfaction of the City.
9.35 Vehicle parking areas should be provided to allow for coordinated
access to/from other adjoining lots and encourage safe pedestrian
movement around the centre.
9.36 Where a lot abuts a right of way (laneway), vehicle access to the
property is to be from the right of way and not the street frontage
(where practical).
9.37 Where the property abuts a secondary street but not a right of way
(laneway), vehicle access to the property is to be from the secondary
street and not the primary street frontage (where practical).
6

10. Development 10.4 Nil setbacks to public streets are required for the first 2 storeys unless 10.12.3 Floor to floor heights for ground floor commercial tenancies
site specific circumstances require alternative approaches to the shall be a minimum of 4.0 metres. This may be varied
satisfaction of the responsible authority. by the responsible authority where required to meet site
Standards for
specific circumstances.
10.5 Nil setbacks to adjoining properties are permitted to a maximum height of
Precincts five storeys. Any level above five storeys is required to be setback at least 10.13 Nil setbacks to public streets are required for the first 2 storeys unless
1.5 metres unless otherwise approved by the responsible authority. site specific circumstances require alternative approaches to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
10.6 Facades facing public streets are to be articulated, coloured and
In addition to the minimum development standards for the structure plan area detailed to present as individual, distinctive frontages similar to the Note: Some lots may also be affected by the Metropolitan Region
in Part 9, the following requirements also apply to the relevant precinct. traditional ‘main-street’ style to the satisfaction of the responsible Scheme road reservation. In this case, the nil setback will be from the
authority. Primary or Other Regional Road Reservation line(s).
Precinct 1 – Riseley Core Character
10.7 Buildings on corners shall address both street frontages and shall 10.14 Nil setbacks to adjoining properties in Precinct 2 are permitted to a
provide a strong architectural element designed to create a local maximum height of five storeys. Any level above five storeys is required
Statement
landmark to be setback at least 1.5 metres unless otherwise approved by the
10.1 The Riseley Core is a pedestrian-scaled, vibrant, mixed use area with responsible authority.
10.8 Active street frontages are required facing Riseley Street and Kearns
a boulevard character. Commercial, entertainment and retail uses are
Crescent and are encouraged facing Canning Highway. 10.15 Setbacks to adjoining properties outside Precinct 2 are as follows:
envisaged on the ground floor to service the local community and
visitors. Residential dwellings and commercial uses are envisaged on
10.9 Residential land uses are not permitted on the ground floor fronting 10.15.1 Development up to 3 storeys in height
upper levels of buildings.
Canning Highway, Riseley Street or Kearns Crescent.
(a) Residential development setback in accordance with
10.2 The objectives for Precinct 1 are to:
the R50 provisions of the Residential Design Codes
Precinct 2 – Canning Corridor Character
with a minimum setback of at least 3 metres
10.2.1 Transition to a more pedestrian-friendly environment that
Statement
encourages walking, cycling and public transport use
(b) Non-residential development setback a minimum of 4
10.10 The Canning Corridor has a high exposure to passing traffic. metres
10.2.2 Improve streetscapes and public spaces
Commercial, showroom and retail uses are envisaged on the ground
10.2.3 Provide active street frontages along Riseley Street floor, with offices and residential uses on the upper levels of buildings. 10.15.2 Development over 3 storeys in height is to have a minimum
setback of at least 8 metres
10.2.4 Encourage active street frontages along Canning Highway 10.11 The objectives for Precinct 2 are to:
10.15.3 Notwithstanding the above, development over 2 storeys
10.2.5 Encourage residential dwellings as a vital component of 10.11.1 Encourage larger scaled development with a high quality in height on No. 797-805 Canning Highway (lots between
the Precinct, whilst protecting ground floor active uses from mix of commercial and residential land uses Simpson and Tain Streets) is to have a minimum setback of
being displaced by residential land uses. at least 8 metres from adjoining properties outside Precinct
10.11.2 Establish a sense of arrival to the activity centre through 2.
the development of landmark buildings and architectural
Precinct 1 – Riseley Core Development
features 10.16 Setbacks to Tain Street are as follows:
Standards
10.11.3 Improve streetscapes and public spaces 10.16.1 Development up to 3 storeys in height may have a nil street
10.3 The following building heights apply in Precinct 1: setback
10.11.4 Encourage active street frontages along Canning Highway
10.3.1 Buildings heights are to be generally in accordance with if possible 10.16.2 Any level above 3 storeys facing Tain Street shall be set
the Structure Plan Map (Plan 1), unless otherwise approved back a minimum of 5 metres from the building line of the
by the responsible authority. 10.11.5 Encourage residential dwellings as a vital component of 3rd storey
the Precinct, whilst protecting ground floor active uses from
10.3.2 A minimum building height of 2 storeys applies across being displaced by residential land uses. 10.17 Facades facing Canning Highway are to be articulated, coloured
Precinct 1, unless otherwise approved by the responsible and detailed to present as individual, distinctive frontages similar to
authority. Precinct 2 – Canning Corridor Development the traditional ‘main-street’ style to the satisfaction of the responsible
authority.
10.3.3 Floor to floor heights for ground floor commercial tenancies Standards
shall be a minimum of 4.0 metres. This may be varied 10.18 Buildings on corners shall address both street frontages and shall
by the responsible authority where required to meet site 10.12 The following building heights apply in Precinct 2: provide a strong architectural element designed to create a local
specific circumstances. landmark
10.12.1 Buildings heights are to be generally in accordance with
10.3.4 Any level above 3 storeys facing a gazetted public street the Structure Plan Map (Plan 1), unless otherwise approved 10.19 Residential land uses are not permitted on the ground floor fronting
shall be set back a minimum of 3 metres from the building by the responsible authority. Canning Highway.
line of the 3rd storey. The responsible authority may vary
10.12.2 A minimum building height of 2 storeys applies across
this requirement if the design facilitates an intimate and
Precinct 2, unless otherwise approved by the responsible
human-scaled place.
authority.
RISELEY ACTIVITY CENTRE STRUCTURE PLAN 7

Precinct 3 – The Crescent Character 10.25.1 Development up to 2 storeys in height: 10.36 Setbacks to adjoining properties outside the structure plan area are
as follows:
Statement (a) Residential development setback in accordance with
the R50 provisions of the Residential Design Codes 10.36.1 Development up to 2 storeys in height:
10.20 The Crescent is the vibrant heart of the activity centre with a variety with a minimum setback of at least 3 metres
of fine-grained shops and entertainment activities on the ground floor. (a) Residential development setback in accordance with
Residential dwellings and commercial uses are envisaged on upper (b) Non-residential development setback a minimum of 4 the R50 provisions of the Residential Design Codes
levels of buildings. The Precinct provides the opportunity to live, work metres with a minimum setback of at least 3 metres
and play in an exciting, urban place.
10.25.2 Development over 2 storeys in height is to have a minimum (b) Non-residential development setback a minimum of 4
10.21 The objectives for Precinct 3 are to: setback of at least 6 metres metres
10.21.1 Provide pedestrian-friendly environment that encourages 10.26 Facades facing public streets are to be articulated, coloured and 10.36.2 Development over 2 storeys in height is to have a minimum
walking, cycling and public transport use detailed to present as individual, distinctive frontages similar to the setback of at least 8 metres
traditional ‘main-street’ style to the satisfaction of the responsible
10.21.2 Encourage high quality mixed use development authority. Precinct 5 – Residential Frame Character
10.21.3 Improve streetscapes and public spaces 10.27 Buildings on corners (including right of way (laneway) corners) shall Statement
address both street frontages and shall provide a strong architectural
10.21.4 Provide active street frontages along Kearns Crescent element designed to create a local landmark 10.37 The Residential Frame is intended to remain as a predominately
residential area and provides for medium to high density residential
10.21.5 Encourage residential dwellings as a vital component of
10.28 Active street frontages are required facing Kearns Crescent development. Given its location next to a busy activity centre, the
the Precinct, whilst protecting ground floor active uses from
amenity of the precinct will be different to the amenity found in
being displaced by residential land uses. 10.29 Residential land uses are not permitted on the ground floor fronting suburban residential areas.
Kearns Crescent
Precinct 3 – The Crescent Development 10.38 The objectives for Precinct 5 are to:
Precinct 4 – Transitional Frame Character
Standards 10.38.1 Encourage high quality residential development
Statement
10.22 The following building heights apply in Precinct 3: 10.38.2 Improve streetscapes and public spaces
10.30 The Transitional Frame provides for the incremental expansion of the
10.22.1 Buildings heights are to be generally in accordance with activity centre over time. The precinct is anticipated to change from a 10.38.3 Increase the residential population of the activity centre
the Structure Plan Map (Plan 1), unless otherwise approved
predominately residential area to also include compatible commercial
by the responsible authority. 10.38.4 Allow smaller-scale compatible commercial uses where
uses. A key feature of the precinct is adaptability, where buildings can
appropriate
be used for different uses over time.
10.22.2 A minimum building height of 2 storeys applies across
Precinct 1, unless otherwise approved by the responsible
10.31 The objectives for Precinct 4 are to: Precinct 5 – Residential Frame Development
authority.
10.31.1 Provide for the incremental expansion of the activity centre Standards
10.22.3 Floor to floor heights for ground floor commercial tenancies
over time.
shall be a minimum of 4.0 metres. This may be varied 10.39 Buildings heights are to be generally in accordance with the Structure
by the responsible authority where required to meet site 10.31.2 Encourage innovative and adaptable buildings Plan Map (Figure 1), unless otherwise approved by the responsible
specific circumstances. authority.
10.31.3 Improve streetscapes and public spaces
10.22.4 Any level above 3 storeys facing Kearns Crescent shall 10.40 Nil setbacks to adjoining properties in Precincts 2 or 5 are permitted
be set back a minimum of 3 metres from the building line 10.31.4 Increase the residential population of the activity centre. to a maximum height of 2 storeys.
of the 3rd storey. The responsible authority may vary this
requirement if the design facilitates an intimate and human- Precinct 4 – Transitional Frame Development 10.41 Rear setbacks to adjoining properties outside the structure plan area
scaled place. are as follows:
Standards
10.23 Nil setbacks to Kearns Crescent are required for the first 2 storeys 10.41.1 Development up to 2 storeys in height:
unless: 10.32 Buildings heights are to be generally in accordance with the Structure
Plan Map (Plan 1), unless otherwise approved by the responsible (a) Residential development setback in accordance with
10.23.1 High quality public spaces and/or al fresco areas are authority. the R50 provisions of the Residential Design Codes
provided; or with a minimum setback of at least 3 metres
10.33 Nil setbacks are permitted to Willcock Street or Simpson Street for up
10.23.2 Site specific circumstances require alternative approaches to 3 storeys. (b) Non-residential development setback a minimum of 4
to the satisfaction of the responsible authority. metres
10.34 Any level above 3 storeys facing a gazetted street shall be set back a
10.24 Nil setback to adjoining properties in Precincts 1, 2 and 3 are permitted to minimum of 5 metres from the building line of the 3rd storey. 10.41.2 Development over 2 storeys in height is to have a minimum
a maximum height of five storeys. Any level above five storeys is required setback of at least 8 metres
to be setback at least 1.5 metres unless otherwise approved by the 10.35 Nil setbacks to adjoining properties in Precincts 1, 3 or 4 are permitted to a
responsible authority. maximum height of 2 storeys. Any level above two storeys is to be setback
in accordance with the Residential Design Codes.
10.25 Setbacks to adjoining properties in Precinct 4 are as follows:
8