State Planning Policy 4.1
Industrial Interface
July 2022
Prepared under Part Three of the Planning and Development Act 2005
by the Western Australian Planning Commission

The Department of Planning, Lands and click to follow
Heritage acknowledges the traditional
owners and custodians of this land. We pay 1 CITATION 1
our respect to Elders past and present, their
descendants who are with us today, and those
who will follow in their footsteps. 2 POLICY INTENT 1
Disclaimer
3 INDUSTRIAL INTERFACE
This document has been produced by the PLANNING 1
Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage
on behalf of the Western Australian Planning
Commission. Any representation, statement, 4 POLICY APPLICATION 2
opinion or advice expressed or implied in this
4.1 Where this policy applies 2
publication is made in good faith and on the
basis that the Government, its employees and 4.2 Policy exemptions 3
agents are not liable for any damage or loss
whatsoever which may occur as a result of
action taken or not taken, as the case may be, 5 POLICY OBJECTIVES 3
in respect of any representation, statement,
opinion or advice referred to herein.
6 POLICY MEASURES 3
Professional advice should be obtained before
applying the information contained in this
6.1 Industrial impacts at all
document to particular circumstances.
planning stages 3
6.2 Avoiding, minimising and
© State of Western Australian managing impacts 6
Published by the 6.3 Assessment of proposals 8
Western Australian Planning Commission
6.4 Advice of relevant
Gordon Stephenson House
authorities to be sought 9
140 William Street
Perth WA 6000 6.5 Precautionary principle 9
Locked Bag 2506
Perth WA 6001 7. DEFINITIONS 10
Publication date: 29 July 2022
Operational date: 29 July 2022
Gazettal date: 29 July 2022
website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
tel: 08 6551 8002
fax: 08 6551 9001
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
This document is available in alternative
formats on application to the Department
of Planning, Lands and Heritage
Communications Branch.

State Planning Policy 4.1
1
Industrial Interface
July 2022
1 CITATION 3 INDUSTRIAL INTERFACE The policy measure used to avoid, mitigate or manage
PLANNING impacts at the industrial interface must be appropriate
This is a State Planning Policy prepared under Part 3 of to each situation and the degree of existing or known
the Planning and Development Act 2005. This policy may Industrial areas and land uses are critical to local, regional, future impact. The relevant planning decision-maker is
be cited as State Planning Policy 4.1 Industrial Interface State and national economies and are significant responsible for considering:
(SPP 4.1). employment generators. Industrial areas may also include a) potential risks to health and amenity of people and
critical state and regional strategic infrastructure (for the environment
example, wastewater treatment plants and waste transfer/
b) any future strategic land use plans for the area
2 POLICY INTENT landfill sites). These areas and the resulting activities can
including potential long-term expansion of industrial
generate dust, noise and odour in addition to other off-
land uses
The purpose of this policy is to seek to prevent conflict site impacts and/or safety risks. This may be as a result
c) the best option for dealing with impacts at the
and encroachment between industrial and sensitive land of a single industrial activity or the cumulative effect of
interface of industrial land uses
uses. It ensures planning decisions consider the locational off-site impacts and/or safety risks from a number of
constraints of land uses, the significant investments activities and has the potential to affect the surrounding d) how to ensure a suitable transition is established
represented, and the current and future benefits and costs environment and people’s health and amenity. between industrial and incompatible land uses.
to communities when assessing proposals where land use
Different types of off-site impacts and/or safety risks may Industrial proposals associated with substantial off-site
conflict may exist or result. This will achieve:
affect health and amenity in different ways. There should impacts and risks often require approvals, permits or
a) appropriate siting and long-term operational be consideration of and encouragement for continuous licences from other government agencies under
certainty for industry improvement that reduces emissions and safety risks in separate policy and legislation. This may occur
b) appropriate siting of sensitive land uses for the line with the development of technological advances. concurrently with planning assessments being
protection of health and amenity for people and the undertaken. These other government agencies have an
To address adverse off-site impacts and/or safety
environment integral role in the assessment of industrial emissions,
risks, consideration must also be given to planning
risks and the demarcation of impact areas. A detailed
c) sustainable land use planning and development the interface between land uses in order to provide a
description of the role other agencies play in the
outcomes consistent with broader State strategic compatible transition. Industries with greater impacts
consideration of industrial and infrastructure proposals is
planning objectives. should have more extensive protections and stronger
contained in the accompanying Industrial Planning Fact
interface measures to minimise the impact area.
Sheet.
An impact area identifies land surrounding industrial land
uses that is currently, or is expected in the future to be,
affected by off-site impacts and/or safety risks. The extent
and delineation of an impact area is determined through
the technical assessment of impacts. This information is
generally provided by the applicant, reviewed by relevant
government agencies, and used to inform planning
decision-making.

State Planning Policy 4.1
2
Industrial Interface
July 2022
4 POLICY APPLICATION
The planning framework provides for the establishment
of industrial zones and includes State, regional and local
The interaction between rural and industrial uses
planning strategies, planning schemes, improvement
schemes, structure plans, and subdivision and SPP 2.5 states that due to their size, scale and potential level of impact, some rural land uses
development applications (including local development could be considered industrial, some rural land uses are located on industrial land, and some
plans). In some instances, there is separate legislation industrial land uses are located on rural land. Planning decision-makers need to consider policy
providing the planning framework where State Planning application in the context of each proposal.
Policies prepared under the Planning and Development
Section 5.11 of SPP 2.5 sets out broad locational criteria for regional facilities. These criteria apply
Act 2005 do not apply, such as land within the Hope
in this policy (SPP 4.1), such that rural industries may be suitably located on rural land where:
Valley Wattleup Redevelopment Act 2000 and Metropolitan
a) they are located on State roads, or roads of a suitable standard or treatment to
Redevelopment Authority Act 2011. In these instances, it is
accommodate the traffic volume and freight task of the land use
recommended that this policy is given due regard by the
relevant planning decision-maker. b) impacts of the land use are contained within the lot boundaries, or satisfactorily avoided,
mitigated or managed, such that noise, amenity, and air and water quality do not
detrimentally affect nearby sensitive land uses
4.1 Where this policy applies
c) they are not visually dominant within key viewsheds, and are visually compatible with
surrounding land uses and development
This policy applies to industrial land and land uses in
Western Australia, in particular: d) they are provided with essential services commensurate with the intended land use.
a) land zoned for industrial purposes in a region or local Other relevant planning considerations for rural industries are:
planning scheme a) the role and function of the land use and whether it relates to primary production
b) industrial land uses on land zoned for industrial b) biosecurity issues that may require the facility to achieve a separation distance that may not
purposes be possible in an industrial estate
c) industrial land uses on land that is not zoned for c) the availability of industrial land in the locality
industrial purposes
d) the strategic direction for rural land and land uses in an applicable local planning strategy.
d) land that may be impacted by industrial land uses
and strategic infrastructure.
There is a relationship between this policy and the
Western Australian Planning Commission State Planning
Policy 2.5 Rural Planning (SPP 2.5), which applies to rural
land and land uses, in that both policies address the
separation of land uses.

State Planning Policy 4.1
3
Industrial Interface
July 2022
Requirements for planning within industrial areas are 5 POLICY OBJECTIVES
6.1 Industrial impacts at all
outlined in Operational Policy 4.1 Industrial Planning.
planning stages
These provisions should be addressed at each relevant The objectives of this policy are to:
planning stage as this may affect interface and/or land use a) Ensure the impacts of industrial land uses are
6.1.1 State and regional planning strategies
conflict outcomes. considered at all stages of the planning process.
This policy applies to planning decision-making at b) Adequately separate industrial land uses and any State and regional strategies should identify:
all stages of the planning process for new proposals resulting off-site impacts and/or safety risks from a) Strategic Industrial Areas (SIAs), including suitable
involving, impacted by, or with the potential to impact, incompatible land uses to: co-location of compatible infrastructure and other
existing or proposed industrial land uses. This includes – protect industrial areas to improve long-term complementary land uses
land impacted by industrial or related activities exempt operational certainty b) industrial land and reserves to accommodate a wide
from planning approval, such as mining operations under
– avoid, mitigate or manage potential impacts variety of existing and future industrial development
the Mining Act 1978.
on the health and amenity of people and the and infrastructure needs
environment c) existing and known future impact areas.
4.2 Policy exemptions – promote co-location of like uses to minimise the
impact area. 6.1.2 Local planning strategies
This policy does not apply to land use conflict associated
c) Plan the land use transition between industrial land
with impacts generated by the following, as these are Local planning strategies should:
uses/infrastructure facilities and sensitive land uses
specifically addressed in separate planning policies and a) identify areas for Strategic, General and Light
by providing compatible zones, reserves and land
guidance documents: Industry, Industrial Development zones and
uses.
a) rural land uses investigation areas
b) the extraction of basic raw materials b) identify, consider and plan for compatible zones,
6 POLICY MEASURES reserves and land uses in impact areas to create a
c) infrastructure corridors such as road and rail or gas
suitable transition and interface.
pipelines
As per the Policy Objectives, industrial impacts should
d) telecommunications infrastructure
be considered at each stage of the planning framework, 6.1.3 Compatible zones, reserves and land uses
e) aircraft noise. increasing in detail at each level. Strategic planning
To ensure industrial impacts are avoided, mitigated or
This policy does not apply retrospectively. documents and planning schemes should address land
managed, where necessary, compatible zones, reserves
use conflict and not defer its resolution or management
and land uses should be provided to allow for a gradual
to the subdivision or development application stage.
land use transition between industrial and sensitive land
This is because mitigation options may be more limited
uses.
and decisions may not adequately consider the protection
of State and/or regionally significant industries, and Compatible zones, reserves and land uses are typically
infrastructure facilities. those considered to be more accommodating or tolerant
of, industrial off-site impacts and/or safety risks and help

State Planning Policy 4.1
4
Industrial Interface
July 2022
maintain operational certainty for industry. The inclusion 6.1.3.2 Local planning schemes When determining proposals under a local planning
of sensitive land uses in compatible zones and reserves scheme that involve industrial land use zones or reserves,
Local planning schemes and amendments should:
should be considered on a case by case basis, and the following should be considered:
a) identify Strategic, General and Light Industry, and
supported only if it can be demonstrated that the a) where required, identification of impact areas in the
Industrial Development zones, and any other related
use is compatible, and the industrial impacts can be local planning scheme with compatible zones and
public purpose reserves that are likely to generate
avoided, mitigated or managed. Compatible zones and reserves
off-site impacts and/or safety risks
reserves may include Light Industry, Service Commercial,
b) rural zoned land located adjacent to Strategic or
Commercial, Rural Enterprise, Rural, Mixed Use and Public b) provide for impact areas and compatible zones and/
General Industry zones is compatible provided
Open Space, among others. or reserves for SIAs, strategic industries, strategic
sensitive land uses on the rural land are not located
infrastructure and major hazard facilities
Where it is considered appropriate and desirable for within the impact area. Consistent with SPP 2.5,
c) align industrial zones and reserves and the
industrial land to have an interface with rural zoned land, single dwellings on rural land are a sensitive land
permissibility of land uses, including incidental or
each instance should be considered on a case by case use and should be afforded a reasonable standard of
ancillary uses, to the objectives as outlined in the
basis and also be guided by SPP 2.5. The interface must rural amenity.
deemed provisions (Planning and Development
ensure existing rural operations can continue to function
and any potential impacts on the health and amenity of (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015) Strategic Industry zones and strategic infrastructure
people and the environment are appropriately avoided, d) consider where existing industrial land uses are
Land uses associated with SIAs, strategic industries,
mitigated or managed. being phased out of an area, and ensure scheme
strategic infrastructure, major hazard facilities and
amendments for redevelopment incorporating
the resulting impact areas should be located in an
6.1.3.1 Region schemes sensitive land uses demonstrate that any impacts on appropriate zone, such as Strategic Industry, or reserve
non-conforming land uses that continue operating
in local planning schemes. This will establish a transition
Region schemes should identify:
are appropriately avoided, mitigated or managed
of compatible zones, reserves and land uses that will
a) industrial zones to accommodate SIAs and industrial
e) in limited circumstances, where reservation or complement surrounding land uses, consistent with
land uses
rezoning of impact areas for strategic industrial planning strategies for the locality.
b) reserves for strategic infrastructure and strategic proposals is not practicable:
Zones, reserves and land uses that are incompatible
hazard facilities.
– utilise other local planning scheme mechanisms
should not be permitted within the impact areas of SIAs,
When considering a proposal involving industrial zones to control development of incompatible land
strategic industries, strategic infrastructure or major
or reserves under a region scheme, the impact areas uses including Special Use zones, special control
hazard facilities.
of SIAs, strategic industries, strategic infrastructure and areas and related scheme provisions
New land use proposals that will affect the integrity of an
major hazard facilities should not incorporate zones – review land use permissibilities to ensure
established compatible interface should not be permitted
which might allow sensitive land uses unless it has been incompatible land uses cannot be supported
within SIAs or any impact areas.
adequately demonstrated that the impacts on these uses within impact areas unless it has been adequately
would be appropriately avoided, mitigated or managed. demonstrated that the impacts on these uses Where practicable, strategic infrastructure facilities should
could be appropriately avoided, mitigated or be located in precincts or clusters of compatible and
managed. complementary infrastructure and land uses to reduce the
overall impact area.

State Planning Policy 4.1
5
Industrial Interface
July 2022
General Industry zones supporting land uses that could be inconsistent with the
Strategic Industrial Areas
Industrial Development zone and future purpose of the
General industry land uses, and ideally the associated
area.
impact area, should be contained within the General SIAs are areas of significant economic and strategic
Industry zone. Impacts not able to be contained within importance for the State or region. SIAs should
Light Industry zones and other compatible zones
the General Industry zone may, following a technical incorporate impact areas that require suitable and
and reserves
impact assessment, be accommodated within compatible appropriate integration with surrounding compatible
zones and reserves to provide an appropriate interface. zones, reserves and land uses to ensure the site can: The Light Industry zone can be used in conjunction
The effect of future industrial development and a) expand and grow over time with other compatible zones and reserves, such as the
expansion, and the potential resulting off-site impacts, Commercial zone, to achieve a compatible land use
b) prevent or minimise the encroachment of
should also be considered. transition at the interface of General Industry or Strategic
incompatible land uses
Industry zones. Public open space, and related reserves,
Sensitive land uses should not be permitted in the c) ensure off-site impacts and/or safety risks are
can be a compatible land use in some circumstances
General Industry zone or the associated impact areas managed within a defined area.
depending on its intended use, and the type and
within General Industry zones. This includes discouraging
It is important that proposals within a SIA follow extent of off-site impacts and/or safety risks that may be
and, where possible, preventing the development of
best practice approaches and include appropriate experienced.
new sensitive land uses within the impact area on Rural
standards according to licences or works approvals
zoned land. The type and location of sensitive land uses The location of sensitive land uses within Light Industry
from relevant agencies. These are often separate from
in the surrounding compatible zones or reserves should zones should be considered on a case by case basis,
the planning process.
be contemplated on a case by case basis, and supported and supported only if it can be demonstrated that the
only if it can be demonstrated that the use is compatible, use is compatible, and the industrial impacts can be
and the industrial impacts can be appropriately avoided, appropriately avoided, mitigated or managed. There is a
mitigated or managed. general presumption against land uses with a residential
The Industrial Development zone should seek to contain purpose within the Light Industry zone.
Industrial Development zones the impact area because land uses are often unknown.
Light Industry zones and other compatible zones and
Where off-site impacts are unable to be managed
The Industrial Development zone designates land for reserves that directly adjoin sensitive land uses should be
within the extent of the zone, the impact area should be
future industrial development as an interim measure designed to:
accommodated within compatible zones and reserves to
ahead of more detailed planning taking place typically in
a) ensure any emission and risk impacts do not exceed
provide an appropriate interface, with consideration given
the form of a structure plan.
the site boundary
to land use mix and the probability of future expansion.
Planning for Industrial Development zones should have b) provide a high level of amenity to complement the
The location of new sensitive land uses within Industrial
consideration for the provision of a compatible transition land use transition.
Development zones should be contemplated on a
between industrial and sensitive zones, reserves and land
case by case basis, and supported only if it can be Light industrial land use impacts are generally more
uses.
demonstrated that the use is compatible, and the manageable and require more stringent measures for
industrial impacts can be appropriately avoided, mitigated those uses at the direct interface with sensitive land
or managed. There is a general presumption against uses. Land uses in the Light Industry zone which have

State Planning Policy 4.1
6
Industrial Interface
July 2022
the potential to generate emissions that affect adjoining 6.1.6 Subdivision and development Applications for development approval should generally
land should not be located directly at the interface with only be supported where it has been adequately
This section should be read in conjunction with
sensitive land uses and should preferably be closer to an demonstrated that any industrial impacts can be
Operational Policy 4.1 Industrial Planning.
adjoining General Industry or Strategic Industry zone. managed within the existing extent of the impact area.
Industrial subdivision should accommodate and
design potential industrial land uses in such a way as
6.1.4 Improvement schemes
6.2 Avoiding, minimising and
to sufficiently avoid, mitigate or manage impacts on
Where an improvement scheme is being prepared, the adjoining land. managing impacts
measures in this policy related to the preparation of
The following should be considered in relation to this One of the key elements in achieving the objectives of
region and local planning schemes are relevant.
policy: this policy is ensuring that zones, reserves and sites are
a) development associated with off-site impacts and/ suitable for their intended purpose. At each stage of
6.1.5 Structure plans
or safety risks is located within the appropriate zone the planning process, planning decision-makers need to
or reserve and there is provision of a compatible land consider the broad suitability of land uses and the ability
A structure plan may be needed where there is
use transition between industry and sensitive zones to avoid, mitigate or manage industrial impacts. In the
fragmented land requiring coordination, such as
and reserves same way, planning decision-makers need to consider
for freight roads and transport routes, infrastructure
the broad suitability of sensitive land uses and the ability
upgrades, drainage provision, contaminated sites, a b) development on land within impact areas is to
to avoid future constraints imposed on industries located
development contribution plan and/or if located in the be consistent with the purpose of providing a
appropriately within the industry zone or scheme reserve.
Industrial Development zone. A structure plan may be compatible land use transition between industries
required to facilitate and coordinate the subdivision and and sensitive land uses, and should not include
development of industrial land and infrastructure reserves. industrial proposals that would affect the integrity of 6.2.1 Defining an impact area
This should provide for a transition of compatible zones the interface
Where proposals have potentially detrimental impacts,
and reserves between industrial and sensitive land uses. c) information on the nature and extent of any off-site
including off-site impacts and/or safety risks which extend
A well-planned transition will assist in the process of impacts, which may include technical assessments
beyond zone and reserve boundaries, mitigation and
normalising the structure plan area into the local planning and reports and/or proposed management plans
management through the introduction of compatible
scheme. to support development applications and local
zones, reserves and land uses should be considered.
development plans
Structure planning over impact areas that are zoned
This land use transition will make provision for sufficient
urban and are related to SIAs and strategic proposals d) identification of any approvals, permits or licences
separation of industry impacts from sensitive zones and
more generally, should not permit sensitive land uses, required under other legislation, such as approvals
land uses, and for any impact areas to be encapsulated
unless it has been adequately demonstrated that the and licencing under the Environmental Protection Act
within established compatible zones and reserves.
impacts on these uses can be appropriately avoided, 1986 and safety requirements under the Dangerous
Where it is anticipated that there will be adverse
mitigated or managed. Goods Safety Act 2004 and Petroleum and Geothermal
impacts on nearby sensitive land uses, it will need to be
Energy Resources Act 1967, among others, as they
demonstrated that adequate mitigation or management
relate to the planning application.
of off-site impacts and/or safety risks can be achieved by

State Planning Policy 4.1
7
Industrial Interface
July 2022
way of management plans or similar. This information environmental policy and guidance, water resource
or assessment should be included as part of a planning management policy, prescribed standards, accepted
proposal. Management and/or mitigation requirements industry standards and/or codes of practice
should not be imposed on existing surrounding sensitive h) whether, prior to issuing an approval, any
land users. management plans associated with the proposal are
In addition to those matters required under clause 67 of capable of being implemented.
the deemed provisions (Planning and Development (Local Impact areas should be defined through appropriate
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015), determination of consideration of the adverse effects on nearby existing
an impact area should consider: or future sensitive land uses using a combination of
a) existing and, where known, future off-site impacts, monitoring and modelling, technical reporting, risk
including atypical operating conditions and assessment and the consideration of strategies for the
parameters (for example, shutdown, maintenance locality. When making a decision it may be appropriate
activities, construction activities, failure of emission to consider the broader merits of the proposal for the
control plant and equipment) precinct or region, compare likely impacts from similar
b) the full build-out including any future expansion industrial uses, and apply general risk-based principles,
plans and the likely ultimate extent such as the precautionary principle or a risk assessment
matrix.
c) potential cumulative impacts of existing land uses
d) any separation distances recommended in
government policy and guidance
e) the existing or potential requirement for approvals,
licenses and/or registration under the Environmental
Protection Act 1986, among others
f) whether the design and/or operation of the
industrial proposal is in accordance with
environmental policy and guidance, water resource
management policy, prescribed standards, accepted
industry standards or codes of practice as per referral
advice from relevant agencies
g) whether modelling and/or monitoring is required
where impacts on sensitive land uses outside
the property boundary are unknown and/or
not anticipated to meet the parameters used in

State Planning Policy 4.1
8
Industrial Interface
July 2022
6.3 Assessment of proposals
Planning approach for impact areas
The applicable planning measure(s) proposed for use within impact areas should reflect the Based on the advice of other authorities, the relevant
type and scale of impacts, any related cumulative industrial impacts, and the strategic planning planning decision-maker should consider:
direction for each proposal. This will be informed by: a) health, amenity and environmental impacts arising
• the level of risk to the amenity and health of people and the environment from proposals
• the level of risk to long-term operations of industry b) existing and proposed future land uses within the
impact area and wider context, particularly the
• the complexity in assessment, ongoing monitoring and control measures applied to manage
location of sensitive land uses
impacts and the practicality of applying these in perpetuity
c) current monitoring and future modelling of any
• the suitability of supporting information provided to ensure health and amenity are protected.
cumulative impacts from other industries in the
The preferred planning measure, or a combination thereof, that can be applied to proposals and industrial area including both point source and
the associated impact areas include: fugitive emissions
• zoning or reserving industry and infrastructure in region and local planning schemes d) potential for intensification of industrial land uses
• providing for impact areas in local planning schemes and, where required, providing a land in the industrial area that may result in increased
use transition between industry and sensitive land uses. cumulative off-site impacts and/or safety risks over
time
In limited circumstances, where the above planning measures may not be sufficient to address
e) cost and benefit of any associated mitigation and
the conflict, the following planning measures may be applied to industry/infrastructure facilities
management measures, and whether it is sustainable
and the associated impact areas:
in perpetuity.
• zoning industry and impact areas as Special Use in a local planning scheme, to provide for a
specific compatible land use configuration To support the assessment process, applicants may be
required to supply the following technical assessments:
• designation of a special control area to prohibit incompatible land uses and impose specific
building standards related to sensitive land uses a) information on activities undertaken at the facility,
or associated with the facility, that may result in
• other local planning scheme provisions, such as controls on land uses related to structure
emissions or cumulative impacts
plans, and notifications on titles to alert prospective landowners at subdivision and
development application stages. b) impact modelling, such as contour mapping,
illustrating standard operating conditions, based
There are other planning measures used more broadly in land use planning that do not utilise
on modelled separation distances and regulatory
standard region or local planning scheme provisions, which can, in part, assist in addressing off-
approvals and conditions
site impacts and/or safety risks. These should only apply to unique situations, typically large areas
c) impact modelling illustrating worst-case scenarios,
that require specialised planning outcomes. The measures include:
based on non-standard operating conditions
• improvement plans and improvement schemes
including but not limited to:
• the establishment of specific legislation.

State Planning Policy 4.1
9
Industrial Interface
July 2022
– shutdowns, accidents, start-ups and extreme discretion in planning decision-making to support
6.5 Precautionary principle
events innovative solutions to prevent or reduce the potential for
– options for avoiding, mitigating or managing the land use conflict. The precautionary principle, as defined in this policy,
impacts and associated costs, both financial and should be applied where there is a proposal involving
social off-site impacts or risks where inadequate information
6.4 Advice of relevant authorities
is known or available about the impacts, and where
d) risk analysis of impacts on sensitive land uses based
to be sought these impacts are difficult to avoid, mitigate or manage,
on:
or where the cost to do so is not commensurate with
– the type of use (for example, a residential area or Some planning proposals for industrial land uses lodged
the risk. This will be particularly important if there are
school) with the relevant planning decision-maker may need
potential significant adverse health and amenity impacts
– population and demographic statistics to to be referred to other authorities, such as government
on existing or proposed sensitive land uses within impact
determine the number of people potentially agencies and utility providers, for a review of the impact
areas, where consequences and mitigation measures
affected and their susceptibility assessment. An overview of relevant agencies to be
need to be weighed more carefully.
consulted can be found in the accompanying Industrial
– hypothesis of impacts that may be reasonable
Planning Fact Sheet. Where it has not been adequately demonstrated that
under non-standard conditions (for example,
the industrial impacts can be identified and avoided,
the number of events exceeding the relevant The referral should include any accompanying technical
mitigated or managed, and there is uncertainty regarding
standard that would be tolerated by those and risk assessment reports related to impacts. This may
the potential risk to health and amenity, a conservative
affected) require a combination of quantitative technical analysis
approach to defining the impact area should be applied.
e) risk analysis exploring implications on long-term and qualitative risk and land use assessments.
operations of industry
In support of the proposal, the assessment of industrial
f) any other relevant information required by the impacts will need to demonstrate:
planning decision-maker and/or other government
a) off-site impacts and/or safety risks are within
agencies to demonstrate acceptability.
acceptable limits within the impact area based on
Where pre-development modelling is inconclusive and/or applicable standards and guidelines, and can be
may result in a high level of risk, approval of new sensitive maintained within those limits (including worst-
land uses should be avoided until post-construction case scenarios, based on non-standard operating
monitoring has occurred, and actual impacts are better conditions)
defined. This may result in sensitive land uses being b) an appropriate level of separation between industry
refused if they are an incompatible land use within the emissions and risks and sensitive land uses can be
impact area as per the precautionary principle. achieved to sufficiently avoid, mitigate or manage
potential adverse health and amenity impacts on the
This policy recognises that each proposal is to be
surrounding environment and land uses.
considered on a case by case basis, and that the
determination of a proposal may involve the use of

State Planning Policy 4.1
10
Industrial Interface
July 2022
7 DEFINITIONS Industry Precautionary principle
As per the definition contained in the Planning and The presumption against approving further strategic
Compatible zones and reserves
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. planning proposals, subdivision and development
Zones and reserves which contain land uses that are applications or intensification of land uses where there
generally tolerant of odour, dust, noise and other Infrastructure reserve is a lack of certainty that the potential for significant
industrial emissions, and where sensitive land uses are adverse impacts can be adequately avoided, mitigated or
Any reserve in a planning scheme which provides
generally avoided or considered on a case by case basis. managed in the opinion of the decision-maker.
for infrastructure, for example reserves for ports and
The range of compatible land use zones and reserves may
wastewater treatment plants.
depend on the nature of off-site impacts and/or safety Rural land
risks.
Interface Land zoned or identified for agricultural or rural use in a
region or local planning scheme or strategy.
Impact areas A point where different types of land uses meet or are in
close proximity.
Land surrounding industrial land uses that is currently, Rural land use
or is expected in the future to be, affected by off-site
Major hazard facilities Land uses that are rural in nature and that support and
impacts and/or safety risks that have the potential to be
are associated with primary production, basic raw material
detrimental to the health and amenity of people and Major hazard facilities are those involved in storage,
extraction, biodiversity conservation, natural resource
the environment. This may involve land affected by the handling or processing of specified dangerous goods that
management, public purposes (for example, prisons,
cumulative emissions and risks from an industrial area or a exceed specific quantity thresholds, as determined by the
cemeteries, public utilities and waste management
single industrial activity. Chief Dangerous Goods Officer of the State Government
facilities) and protection of landscapes and views. Does
agency responsible for major industry. These include
not include rural living.
Incompatible land use oil refineries, gas processing plants, large chemical
manufacturing and large liquefied petroleum gas storage
Incompatible land uses are those considered to conflict Sensitive land use
and distribution facilities. Major hazard facilities of State
with or be adversely affected by impacts arising from
significance may be referred to as strategic hazard Land uses that are residential or institutional in nature,
nearby industrial areas and land uses. For example,
facilities. where people live or regularly spend extended periods
residential land with high safety and amenity expectations
of time. These include, but are not limited to, dwellings,
could be incompatible with industrial land uses that
Off-site impacts short stay accommodation, hospitals, educational
generate substantial detrimental impacts. Land uses that
establishments, childcare centres, corrective institutions
attract a large number of people for an extended period Impacts such as odour, noise, spray drift, vibration, dust,
and places of worship. It generally excludes commercial or
of time are generally considered incompatible with land groundwater, air pollution or light spill that cannot be
industrial premises. Public open space can be a sensitive
uses associated with off-site impacts and/or safety risks. contained within a property boundary. These are impacts
land use in some circumstances depending on its
which remain after mitigation and management to
intended use, for example, if it is intended that people will
regulatory and/or policy standards.
congregate and spend extended periods of time there.

State Planning Policy 4.1
11
Industrial Interface
July 2022
Sensitive zone Strategic industries
An umbrella term describing land use zones that High intensity industries of State significance such
specifically provide for development of sensitive land as but not limited to mineral processing, advanced
uses. These may include Urban, Urban Development, manufacturing, power generation or wastewater
Residential, Rural Living and Community Purpose zones processing. Strategic industries can have substantial
and proposals for lifting of Urban Deferment. emissions.
Separation distance Strategic infrastructure
As defined in Government environmental policy, a Infrastructure sites or precincts of State significance,
separation distance is a recommended distance necessary such as, but not limited to, major power generation
to separate a source of emissions (gaseous and particulate and transmission facilities, wastewater treatment plants,
emissions, dust, odour and noise) from sensitive land uses water treatment plants including desalination and water
in order to avoid impacts to health and amenity. recycling plants, major wastewater pump stations, major
waste facilities, major trading ports, boat harbours and
State significance intermodal terminals, or as determined by the State
Government agency responsible for State development
A land use, area or issue that is considered by the State
and/or the Western Australian Planning Commission.
to be of significance to the State of Western Australia
by virtue of any or all of its economic, social, cultural or
environmental values.
Strategic Industrial Areas
Industrial areas of significant economic and strategic
importance to the State, zoned or planned for strategic
industry, as identified by the State Government agency
responsible for State development. Strategic Industrial
Areas provide strategically located industrial land
designed for investment in downstream processing and
other heavy or strategic industrial activities which may
generate off-site impacts. Strategic Industrial Areas are
formally recognised in planning schemes, typically as a
Strategic Industry zone.