THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL GAZETTED COPY
GAZETTED COPIES CAN BE OBTAINED FROM STATE LAW PUBLISHER
GAZETTAL DATE: TUESDAY 30 JULY 2013
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT ACT 2005
STATE PLANNING POLICY No. 2.6
STATE COASTAL PLANNING POLICY
PREPARED UNDER PART 3 OF THE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
ACT 2005 BY THE WESTERN AUSTRALIAN PLANNING COMMISSION
REPLACES STATE PLANNING POLICY 2.6 AS PUBLISHED IN THE
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE ON 10 JUNE 2003 AND AMENDED ON 19
DECEMBER 2006

PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT ACT 2005
STATE PLANNING POLICY No. 2.6
STATE COASTAL PLANNING POLICY
Contents
1. Citation
2. Introduction and background
2.1 The Western Australian coast
2.2 The policy context
2.3 Relationship to other WAPC policies and guidelines
2.4 The policy purpose
3. Application of the policy
4. Policy objectives
5. Policy measures
5.1 General measures
5.2 Development and settlement
5.3 Water resources and management
5.4 Building height limits
5.5 Coastal hazard risk management and adaptation planning
5.6 Infill development
5.7 Coastal protection works
5.8 Public interest
5.9 Coastal foreshore reserve
5.10 Coastal strategies and management plans
5.11 Precautionary principle
6. Implementation
7. Definitions

Schedule One
Calculation of coastal processes
1. Introduction
2. Planning time frame
3. Coastal classification
3.1 Sandy Coast
3.2 Rock Coast
3.2.1 Hard rock coast
3.2.2 Soft sedimentary rock coast
3.2.3 Weakly lithified sedimentary rock coast
3.3 Mixed sandy and rocky coast
3.3.1 Fringing reefs
3.3.2 Rocky platforms
3.3.3 Discontinuous rocky shorelines
3.4 Coastal lowlands
3.5 Tidal reaches of inland waters
3.6 Islands
4. Calculation of coastal processes
4.1 Climate change
4.2 Horizontal shoreline datum
4.3 Coastal protection works
4.4 Allowance for the current risk of erosion
4.4.1 (S1 Erosion) Allowance for the current risk of storm erosion
4.4.2 (S2 Erosion) Allowance for historic shoreline movement trends
4.4.3 (S3 Erosion) Allowance for erosion caused by future sea level rise
4.5 Allowance for erosion on rocky coasts
4.6 Allowance for erosion on mixed sandy and rocky coasts
4.6.1 Allowance for erosion on fringing reefs
4.6.2 Allowance for erosion on rocky platforms
4.6.3 Allowance for erosion on discontinuous rocky coasts
4.7 Allowance for erosion on coastal lowlands
4.8 Allowance for erosion on tidal reaches of inland waters
4.9 Allowance for erosion on islands
4.10 Allowance for storm surge inundation on all coasts
4.10.1 (S4 Inundation) Allowance for the current risk of storm surge inundation
5. Definition of the storm event
5.1 Sheltered coasts
6. Tsunamis
7. Variations
7.1 Public recreation facilities with finite lifespan
7.2 Coastally dependant and easily relocatable development
7.3 Department of Defence
7.4 Industrial and commercial development
7.5 Coastal nodes
7.6 Surf life saving clubs
Figures
Figure 1: Coastal areas

1. Citation
This is a State Planning Policy made under Part 3 of the Planning and Development Act 2005. This
Policy may be cited as State Planning Policy No. 2.6 State Coastal Planning Policy.
2. Introduction and background
2.1 The Western Australian coast
The Western Australian coastal zone is a significant asset of the state in terms of its environmental,
economic, social and cultural resources.
The Western Australian coastal zone varies in character and patterns of use and includes:
 urban coasts – where the adjacent uses are predominantly residential and commercial and there is a
high demand for recreational activity;
 natural coasts – with less intensive hinterland uses and concentrations of tourism and associated
recreational and cultural activities; and
 remote coasts – with limited opportunity for low key tourism and associated recreational and cultural
activities.
There are pressures on the coastal zone for use by different groups in the community for a variety of
purposes including a mix of recreational, residential, industrial and commercial uses. Planning for coastal
zone land is about balancing these often competing needs and desires in a way that takes into account the
values of the coastal zone, which include its scenic, aesthetic and ecological qualities; recreational
opportunities; and social, indigenous, cultural and economic importance. The overall effect of these
values contributes to the psychological wellbeing and health of the Western Australian community. The
presence of coastal hazards is also an important consideration.
There is also growing pressure on coastal resources as the state's population increases, coastal-based
industries expand and technological changes make remote areas more accessible. Successful coastal zone
planning today will ensure that current and future generations of Western Australians can benefit from
the opportunities presented by the values and resources of the Western Australian coast.
2.2 The policy context
Section 77 of the Planning and Development Act 2005 requires local governments, when preparing or
amending a local planning scheme, to have due regard to this State Coastal Planning Policy where it
affects its district. The local governments may decide to make a new or amended scheme consistent with
particular aspects of this State Coastal Planning Policy, or include in a new or amended scheme a
provision that this State Coastal Planning Policy is to be read as part of the scheme.
The State Planning Strategy provides a strategic basis for coordinating and promoting land use, transport
and land development in a sustainable manner throughout Western Australia. The Strategy sets out the
guidance for achieving the state goals of generating wealth and prosperity; preserving and enhancing the
environment; and building vibrant and safe communities for enjoyment of current and subsequent
generations of Western Australians.
State Planning Policy No. 1 State Planning Framework Policy (SPP1) brings together existing state and
regional policies and plans that apply to land use and development in Western Australia, into a State
Planning Framework. SPP1 identifies the policies, plans, strategies and guidelines as well as regional
strategies, regional and sub-regional structure plans, strategic policies and operation policies and
guidelines prepared from time to time and used by the Western Australian Planning Commission
(WAPC) and the Department of Planning in making decisions.
State Planning Policy No. 2: Environment and Natural Resources Policy (SPP2) sets out the broad
environment and resource management policies for sustainable development.
Under SPP2 planning strategies, schemes and decision-making will identify and, where appropriate,
include provisions for the sustainable use of the coast.

2
This State Coastal Planning Policy is consistent with and complementary to the State Planning Strategy,
SPP1 and SPP2 and should be read and applied within the context provided by these policies.
2.3 Relationship to other WAPC policies and guidelines
SPP2.6 applies state-wide and draws on and is supported by other WAPC state planning policies,
development control policies and guidelines relevant to the coastal zone. Application of these other
policies and guidelines is to be made in view of this policy, including but not limited to:
State planning policies
 1 State Planning Framework Policy
 2 Environment and Natural Resources Policy
 2.9 Water Resources
 2.10 Swan-Canning River System
 3 Urban Growth and Settlement
 3.4 Natural Hazards and Disasters
 3.5 Historic Heritage Conservation
 3.6 Development Contributions and Infrastructure
 6.1 Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge Policy
 6.3 Ningaloo Coast.
Development control policies
 1.1 Subdivision of Land - General Principles,
 1.2 Development Control - General Principles,
 1.8 Canal Estates and other Artificial Waterway Developments,
 2.3 Public Open Space in Residential Areas and
 4.2 Planning for Hazards and Safety.
Coastal planning guidelines
For coastal matters this State Planning Policy No. 2.6 State Coastal Planning Policy is to be viewed as the
higher order and prevailing policy.
2.4 The policy purpose
The purpose of this Policy is to provide guidance for decision-making within the coastal zone including
managing development and land use change; establishment of foreshore reserves; and to protect, conserve
and enhance coastal values. This policy recognises and responds to regional diversity in coastal types;
requires that coastal hazard risk management and adaptation is appropriately planned for; and encourages
innovative approaches to managing coastal hazard risk, and provides public ownership of coastal
foreshore reserves.
The Policy is to inform and guide decision-making by the WAPC and its Committees, and in integrating
and coordinating the activities of state agencies that influence the use and development of land in the
coastal zone. The Policy will also guide local governments, state government agencies, the State
Administrative Tribunal and the State Government of those aspects of state planning policy concerning
the coastal zone that should be taken into account in planning decision-making.
There are many agencies with statutory responsibilities along the Western Australian coast. While
recognising these responsibilities, this Policy provides a framework for coordinating those agencies
activities with those of the private sector to ensure an integrated approach for coastal planning. The
Policy also provides guidance for private landowners wishing to undertake development in the coastal
zone.
This Policy also provides guidance for situations where planning decisions occur outside the framework
of the Planning & Development Act 2005, such as for unvested Crown land, pastoral lease, indigenous
and conservation estate land.

3
3. Application of the policy
This Policy applies to the coast throughout Western Australia, including:
 sandy coasts, rocky coasts, mixed sandy and rocky coasts, coastal lowlands, and tidal
reaches of inland waters;
 near shore marine waters, state waters;
 all islands within the state lying seawards of the mainland; and
 land use and development within the coastal zone.
The application of this Policy should be read in conjunction with legislation, policy, management plans
and responsibilities of other relevant decision-making and management authorities.
4. Policy objectives
The objectives of this Policy are to:
1. ensure that development and the location of coastal facilities takes into account coastal
processes, landform stability, coastal hazards, climate change and biophysical criteria;
2. ensure the identification of appropriate areas for the sustainable use of the coast for
housing, tourism, recreation, ocean access, maritime industry, commercial and other
activities;
3. provide for public coastal foreshore reserves and access to them on the coast; and
4. protect, conserve and enhance coastal zone values, particularly in areas of landscape,
biodiversity and ecosystem integrity, indigenous and cultural significance.
5 Policy measures
5.1 General measures
(i) Local and regional planning strategies, structure plans, schemes, subdivisions, strata
subdivision, development applications, coastal planning strategies and foreshore
management plans, as well as other planning decisions and instruments relating to the
coast should comply with the policy measures.
(ii) The policy measures where relevant should be read in conjunction with Schedule One
and the Coastal Planning Guidelines prepared and endorsed under this policy.
5.2 Development and settlement
(i) Encourage urban development to be concentrated in and around existing settlements,
particularly those with established infrastructure and services. Continuous linear urban
development along the coast should be discouraged or, where it has occurred, carefully
controlled. Proposed major urban development outside existing settlements will only be
supported where a genuine community need has been demonstrated and the
environmental capability has been properly assessed.
(ii) Ensure that when selecting a development location, regard is given to infrastructure
capacity and where possible, existing infrastructure be upgraded and improved.
(iii) Ensure that when identifying areas suitable for development, consideration is given to
strategic sites for coastal access and commercial development that is demonstrably
dependent on a foreshore location including ports, boat harbours and regional boat
ramps.

4
(iv) Ensure that use of the coast, including the marine environment, for recreation,
conservation, tourism, commerce, industry, housing, ocean access and other appropriate
activities, is sustainable and located in suitable areas.
(v) Ensure that land use and development, including roads, adjacent to the coast is sited
and designed to complement and enhance the coastal environment in terms of its visual,
amenity, social and ecological values.
(vi) Avoid significant and permanent negative impacts on the environment, either on or off
site.
5.3 Water resources and management
(i) Coastal development should manage water resources in accordance with the principles
of water sensitive urban design and integrated water cycle management. This includes
treating all urban water flows as potential resources, and giving consideration to all
water users, including the community, industry and the environment.
(ii) Development on or near the coast should maintain or restore pre-existing or desirable
environmental flows and hydrological cycles within foreshore reserves. Development
on or near the coast should not discharge any waste or stormwater that could
significantly degrade the coastal environment, including the coastal foreshore reserve,
coastal waters and marine ecosystems.
(iii) Stormwater flows from development areas that comply with the Stormwater
Management Manual for Western Australia may be incorporated into foreshore
reserves. Permitted stormwater management measures within coastal foreshore reserves
are detention/infiltration areas and overland flow paths onto the beach for major flow
events, subject to minimal landform modification within the dune system.
Detention/infiltration areas should be located landward of the allowance for coastal
processes identified as part of determination of a coastal foreshore reserve under
section 5.9 (i) below.
(iv) There is a general presumption against the use of coastal foreshore reserves for the
management of wastewater or to accommodate any portion of infrastructure or site
works used for wastewater management.
5.4 Building height limits
(i) The provisions of this part of the policy apply to all development within 300 metres of
the horizontal shoreline datum, but do not apply to industrial or resource development,
transport, telecommunications and engineering infrastructure, and Port Works and
Facilities (as defined by the Port Authorities Act 1999).
(ii) Maximum height limits should be specified as part of controls outlined in a local
planning scheme and/or structure plan, in order to achieve outcomes which respond to
the desired character, built form and amenity of the locality.
(iii) When determining building height controls in a local planning scheme and/or structure
plan, building heights should have due regard to the following planning criteria:
(a) development is consistent with the overall visual theme identified as part of
land use planning for a locality or in an appropriate planning control
instrument such as a local planning strategy;
(b) development takes into account the built form, topography and landscape
character of the surrounding area;
(c) the location is part of an identified coastal node;

5
(d) the amenity of the coastal foreshore is not detrimentally affected by any
significant overshadowing of the foreshore; and
(e) there is overall visual permeability of the foreshore and ocean from nearby
residential areas, roads and public spaces.
5.5 Coastal hazard risk management and adaptation planning
(i) Adequate coastal hazard risk management and adaptation planning should be
undertaken by the responsible management authority and/or proponent where existing
or proposed development or landholders are in an area at risk of being affected by
coastal hazards over the planning timeframe. Coastal hazard risk management and
adaptation planning should include as a minimum, a process that establishes the
context, vulnerability assessment, risk identification, analysis, evaluation, adaptation,
funding arrangements, maintenance, monitoring and review, and communicate and
consult.
(ii) Where a coastal hazard risk is identified it should be disclosed to those likely to be
affected. On consideration of approval for subdivision and/or development current
and/or future lot owners should be made aware of the coastal hazard risk by providing
the following notification on the certificate on title: VULNERABLE COASTAL
AREA –This lot is located in a area likely to be subject to coastal erosion and/or
inundation over the next 100 years.
(iii) Where risk assessments identify a level of risk that is unacceptable to the affected
community or proposed development, adaptation measures need to be prepared to
reduce those risks down to acceptable or tolerable levels. Adaptation measures should
be sought from the following coastal hazard risk management and adaptation planning
hierarchy on a sequential and preferential basis:
(1) Avoid the presence of new development within an area identified to be
affected by coastal hazards. Determination of the likely consequences of
coastal hazards should be done in consideration of local conditions and in
accordance with the guidelines provided in Schedule One.
(2) Planned or Managed Retreat or the relocation or removal of assets within an
area identified as likely to be subject to intolerable risk of damage from coastal
hazards over the planning time frame.
(3) If sufficient justification can be provided for not avoiding development of land
that is at risk from coastal hazards then Accommodation adaptation measures
should be provided that suitably address the identified risks. Such measures
would involve design and/or management strategies that render the risks from
the identified coastal hazards acceptable.
(4) Where sufficient justification can be provided for not avoiding the use or
development of land that is at risk from coastal hazards and accommodation
measures alone cannot adequately address the risks from coastal hazards, then
coastal Protection works may be proposed for areas where there is a need to
preserve the foreshore reserve, public access and public safety, property and
infrastructure that is not expendable.
(iv) Where new information or methods become available that significantly modify the
understanding of the coastal hazards then all areas within the newly defined risk areas
should be reviewed again through the coastal hazard risk management and adaptation
planning hierarchy above, as part of the ongoing monitoring and review process.

6
5.6 Infill development
(i) New development should be located on the least vulnerable portion of the development
site.
(ii) Where development is likely to be subject to coastal hazards over the planning
timeframe, coastal hazard risk management and adaptation planning measures (Section
5.5) should be implemented to reduce the risk from coastal hazards over the full
planning time frame to an acceptable level.
5.7 Coastal protection works
(i) New coastal protection works are not permitted, except where such works are
considered only after all other options for avoiding and adapting to coastal hazards
have been fully explored, as part of a comprehensive coastal hazard risk management
process.
(ii) Existing coastal protection works that require significant upgrade or maintenance over
the planning timeframe should be considered as new coastal protection works,
including consideration of the most appropriate form.
(iii) Coastal protection works should only be supported:
(a) where it is demonstrated there are no significant negative impacts on the
adjacent environment within the sediment cell; and
(b) in conjunction with appropriate funding arrangements for the construction and
ongoing care, control and maintenance being put in place.
(iv) Coastal protection works, where necessary and justified should be:
(a) adequately considered and planned as part of making decisions about land use,
subdivision and development within the coastal zone;
(b) primarily proposed in the public interest to ensure they maintain a coastal
foreshore reserve, public access, public amenity and public safety as well as to
protect high value property and infrastructure that is not expendable; and
(c) evaluated at a sediment cell level and take into consideration the future
protection requirements of adjoining development.
5.8 Public interest
(i) Ensure that adequate opportunity is provided to enable the community to participate in
coastal planning and management, including the support and guidance of activities
undertaken by voluntary coast care groups.
(ii) Community consultation and engagement strategies should be developed to encourage
informed community input into decision-making processes. Communities should have
sufficient information to understand the risks to their communities arising from likely
influence on coastal processes and coastal hazards. Consultation and participation
should raise community awareness, understanding and education of risks and
appropriate responses associated with their region(s).
(iii) The provision of public access to the coast that is consistent with the values and
management objectives of the area including, the interests of security, safety and
protection of coastal resources as well as the recreational opportunities, both on and
offshore, of that section of coast.

7
(vi) Support public ownership of the coast, including where appropriate the provision of a
coastal foreshore reserve and accommodation of regional and local recreational needs.
(v) Support the removal of existing unlawful dwellings (squatter shacks) on coastal Crown
land as per the State Government Squatter Policy (July 1989 and January 1999).
5.9 Coastal foreshore reserve
(i) Coastal foreshore reserves are required to accommodate a range of functions and
values. While local and site specific considerations will vary, the delineation of a
coastal foreshore reserve will include the consideration of, and protection for,
significant natural features such as coastal habitats and, for their biodiversity,
archaeological, ethnographic, geological, geo-morphological, visual or wilderness,
biodiversity and ecosystem integrity, heritage, landscape, seascape, and visual
landscape values; likely impacts of coastal hazards; and opportunities for public access,
public recreation needs and safety to lives and property. Schedule One provides
guidance on how to estimate the potential impacts of coastal hazards, however, this is
only one input into the determination of a coastal foreshore reserve, which will be
required to demonstrate that the values, functions and uses prescribed are available at
the end of the planning timeframe.
(ii) The required coastal foreshore reserve will vary according to the circumstances of any
particular proposal. Each proposal must be assessed on its merits having regard to this
policy, including the principles and guidelines of Schedule One and the Coastal
Planning Policy Guidelines.
(iii) Ensure that the identification of land to be set aside for public ownership for
management, public access, recreation, and conservation is undertaken during the
planning process. Generally this land should be given up free of cost at the time of
development, subdivision or strata subdivision, over and above the required provision
of public open space.
(iv) Support vesting of the coastal foreshore reserve in the relevant local government for the
purposes of coastal foreshore management, public access, recreation and conservation.
Where the land has significant conservation value, vesting should generally be with the
state body responsible for the conservation estate. Opportunities to improve and protect
the conservation values of freehold land should also be pursued.
(v) Ensure that the coastal foreshore reserve is separated from adjacent development in a
way that provides a clear demarcation between public and private land.
5.10 Coastal strategies and management plans
(i) Ensure that at rezoning, structure planning, subdivision, strata subdivision or
development – whichever arises first and is appropriate in scale, a coastal planning
strategy or coastal foreshore management plan is prepared and implemented, by the
local government and/or proponent, for the coastal foreshore reserve and any abutting
freehold land with conservation values of the subject land.
(ii) Any structure plan, zoning, subdivision, strata subdivision or development proposal for
public purposes, residential, industrial, commercial, tourist, special rural and similar
uses on the coast is only approved based on or in conjunction with a current detailed
coastal planning strategy or foreshore management plan (whichever is appropriate for
the stage and scale of development).
(iii) Ensure that the coastal planning strategy or foreshore management plan is developed in
consultation with the broad community and relevant public authorities, and achieve the
approval of the local land manager and the WAPC if appropriate.

8
(iv) The proponent should be responsible for the implementation of the foreshore
management plan as well as funding, maintenance, monitoring and management of
foreshore works for a period not less than five years commencing from completion of
all foreshore works.
(v) A coastal planning strategy or foreshore management plan should address as a
minimum, the matters set out in the Coastal Planning Policy Guidelines.
5.11 Precautionary principle
(i) Where there are threats of serious or irreversible environmental damage, lack of full
scientific certainty should not be used as a reason to postpone measures to prevent
environmental degradation.
(ii) The onus is on any proponent to show that development does not pose any likelihood of
serious or irreversible harm to the environment.
(iii) If the proponent cannot demonstrate there is not a likelihood of such harm, the onus is
on the development proponent to show that the harm can be managed.
6. Implementation
Implementation of this Policy will be through related state planning policies, regional strategies,
local planning strategies and regional and local planning schemes. Implementation will also
occur through the day to day process of decision-making on zoning, structure plans, subdivision,
strata subdivision and development applications, and the actions of other state agencies in
carrying out their responsibilities. New or amended region or local planning schemes should be
consistent with the objectives, policy and guidelines contained in this Policy. Local governments
and state agencies should take account of this Policy to ensure integrated decision-making.
Given the variation of coastal environments in the state and the range of development and use
contexts that can be presented, it is important that this Policy, together with the Schedule One
and Coastal Planning Policy Guidelines, be applied to each case under consideration on its
merits using the best available information, common sense and a precautionary approach.
The Policy and guidelines will be monitored on an ongoing basis and reviewed as required or at
least within five years of its adoption.
7. Definitions
In this Policy, unless the context otherwise requires:
'accretion' refers to shoreline movement where the shoreline shifts seaward increasing the width
of a coastal foreshore reserve and or the distance to a fixed feature on the adjoining
land.
'acceptable' means the risks that do not need further treatment. The expression acceptable level
of risk refers to the level at which it is decided that further restricting or otherwise
altering the activity is not worthwhile. E.g. additional effort will not result in significant
reductions in risk levels.
'adaptation' means an adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or
expected stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial
opportunities. Adaptation is the means for maximising the gains and minimising the
losses associated with coastal hazards over the planning timeframe.
'coastal compartment' means length of shoreline bounded by broad scale changes in geology,
geomorphic structures/landforms or changes in the aspect of the shore.

9
'coastal foreshore reserve' is the area of land on the coast set aside in public ownership to
allow for likely impacts of coastal hazards and provide protection of public access,
recreation and safety, biodiversity and ecosystem integrity, landscape, visual
landscape, indigenous and cultural heritage.
'coastal or foreshore management plan' is a local scale plan, designating areas for various
purposes such as public access, car parks, toilets and surf life saving club rooms, and
providing advice on management needs. Foreshore management plans tend to deal
with a smaller area, be more detailed and are prepared as part of a planning approval
process or ongoing maintenance or upgrading program.
'coastal hazard' means the consequence of coastal processes that affect the environment and
safety of people. Potential coastal hazards include erosion, accretion and inundation.
'coastal node' is a distinct and discrete built area that may be located within a coastal foreshore
reserve. Excluding permanent residential development, it may vary in size from a
grouping of recreational facilities to an area of commercial or tourism facilities or
accommodation.
'coastal planning strategy' is generally a district or subregion scale plan focusing on the coast
designating areas suitable for conservation, recreation and development purposes. It
should include a strategic land use and access strategy and determination of an
appropriate foreshore reserve.
'coastal processes' means any action of natural forces on the coastal environment.
'coastal protection works' means any permanent or periodic work undertaken primarily to alter
physical coastal processes and/or manage the effects of coastal hazards. The influence
of coastal protection works should be evaluated at the sediment cell level.
'coastal zone' includes the areas of water and land that may be influenced by coastal processes.
'consequence' means the outcome or impact of an event. Consequence is expressed qualitatively
or quantitatively – a loss, injury, expressed concern, disadvantage or gain. Consequence
can be more than one consequence from one event, range from positive to negative and
is generally considered in relation to achievement of objectives.
'cross-shore' means perpendicular to the shoreline.
‘development’ has the same meaning as in the Planning and Development Act 2005.
'environment' means conditions or influences comprising built, physical and social elements,
which surround or interact with the community (including the natural conditions, the
natural as modified by human activity and the artificial).
'erosion' refers to shoreline movement where the shoreline shifts landward reducing the width
of a coastal foreshore reserve and/or the distance to a fixed feature on the adjoining
land.
'event' means any occurrence of a particular set of circumstances that can have an adverse
impact(s) on the environment. The event can be certain or uncertain, and be a one-off
occurrence or a series of occurrences of a particular set of circumstances.
‘fetch limited’ means a situation where wave energy is limited by the size of the wave
generation area.
'height' has the same meaning as in the Town Planning Regulations 1967, Appendix B–Model
Scheme Text.

10
'horizontal shoreline datum (HSD)' defines the active limit of the shoreline under storm
activity. It is the line from which a physical processes allowance will be applied from.
'infill development' refers to sites between existing developments.
'intolerable' means risk that is unacceptable in any circumstances or at any level.
'inundation' means the flow of water onto previously dry land. It may either be permanent (for
example due to sea level rise) or a temporary occurrence during a storm event.
'likelihood' means the probability that something will occur. Likelihood is generally expressed
qualitatively or quantitatively.
'longshore' means parallel to the shoreline.
‘management authority’ means any authority with decision-making responsibility over areas of
water and land within the coastal zone.
'peak steady water level (PSWL)' means the highest average elevation of the sea surface
caused by the combined effect of storm surge, tide and wave setup resulting from the
storm events defined in Schedule One section 5.
'precautionary principle' has the meaning in section 5 Policy Measures section 5.11(i).
'risk' is specified in terms of an hazardous event or circumstances and the consequence that
may flow from it. Risk is measured in terms of a combination of the likelihood of an
event occurring and the consequence of that event occurring.
'risk assessment' means the overall process or method for evaluating risks associated with a
specific coastal hazard and includes risk identification, risk analysis and risk
evaluation.
'risk management' means the measures taken to reduce, modify, offset or share risks associated
with development in areas subject to coastal hazards. These include the coordinated
activities to direct and control an organisation with regard to risk; and the culture,
processes and structures that are directed towards realising potential opportunities
whilst managing adverse effects.
‘salient’ means a bulge in the coastline projecting towards an off shore structure natural or
manmade.
'sediment cell' means a length of shoreline in which interruptions to the movement of sediment
along the beaches or near shore sea bed do not significantly affect beaches in the
adjacent lengths of coastline. Within a sediment cell the sediments sources, transport
pathways and sinks should be clearly definable.
‘strategic plan’ may be a coastal strategy or foreshore management plan, structure plan, local
planning scheme, local planning strategy or a plan approved by the WAPC.
‘structure plan’ has the same meaning as in the Structure plan preparation guidelines (July
2012).
‘sustainable’ means achieving as much as possible with as little as possible. This requires
current generations to minimise consumption and imports on natural and other
resources in order to continue their activities in the long-term and maintain future
options. It involves wealth creation, while preserving our natural, biodiversity and
ecosystem integrity and cultural heritage, for the benefit of current and future
generations.

11
'storm surge' means the increase in water level at the shoreline due to the forcing of winds
(wind-setup) and atmospheric pressure.
'tidal reaches of inland waters' has the meaning in Schedule One section 3.5.
'tolerable' means the willingness to live with a risk to secure benefits, on the understanding that
it is being properly controlled. ‘Tolerability’ does not mean ‘acceptability’. Tolerating a
risk does not mean that it is regarded as negligible, or something we may ignore, but
rather as something that needs to be kept under review and reduced further, if and when
able to be done so.
'updrift' means the direction to which the predominant longshore movement of shoreline
material approaches.
'vulnerability' means the degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with,
adverse effects of climate change, including climate variability and extremes.
Vulnerability is a function of the character, magnitude, and rate of climate change and
variation to which a system is exposed, its sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity.
Systems that are highly exposed, sensitive and less able to adapt are vulnerable.
'wave run-up' means the rush of water up a shoreline or structure on the breaking of a wave.
'wave overtopping' means water carried over the top of a structure or landform due to wave
run-up or surge action exceeding the crest.

12
Schedule One
Calculation of coastal processes
1. Introduction
The specific objective of this Schedule is to provide guidance for calculating the component of the
coastal foreshore reserve required to allow for coastal processes. The width calculated from this
Schedule does not delineate a coastal foreshore reserve width. Factors other than coastal processes
will often require additional width and should be considered on a case-by-case basis. These factors
include biodiversity and ecosystem integrity, landscape, seascape, visual landscape, indigenous and
cultural heritage, public access, recreation values and safety to lives and property.
The component of the coastal foreshore reserve to allow for coastal processes should be sufficient to
mitigate the impacts of coastal hazards (including erosion and inundation) by allowing for landform
stability, natural variability and climate change. Notwithstanding this, where the effects of coastal
processes would ordinarily preclude development, but where application of those policy measures are not
realistic nor feasible, coastal hazard risk management and adaptation planning (Section 5.5) should be
undertaken to reduce the risk from coastal hazards over the full planning timeframe, to an acceptable
level.
An appropriate coastal foreshore reserve will include a component to allow for coastal processes and be
of an appropriate width to ensure a coastal foreshore reserve continues to provide the values, functions
and uses prescribed should the coastal processes be realised over the planning timeframe (Policy
measures 5.9 [i]).
2. Planning time frame
These guidelines are based on a 100-year time frame from when a subject proposal is being assessed.
3. Coastal classification
Calculation for coastal processes should be determined with regard to the physical and biological features
of the coast. The following classification of coastal types shall be used and coasts that cannot be
categorised within these types shall be considered on a case-by-case basis.
3.1 Sandy coasts
Sandy coasts comprise unlithified/unconsolidated sediments, rock is either not present or not dominant.
They typically feature gently to moderately sloping shores and are often backed by dunes or beach ridges,
which may contain dune blowouts. The shoreline can quickly alternate between accretion and erosion but
is likely to retreat as a result of sea level rise.
Examples include Swanbourne to Trigg Beach (Perth), Wylie Beach (Esperance), and 80 Mile Beach
(Canning Coast).
3.2 Rocky coasts
Rocky coasts comprise a continuous rocky substrate which extends to an elevation above the active limit
of the shoreline. In most instances this elevation should be defined at least one metre above the HSD.
Coasts with discontinuous or low elevation rock shall be classified as mixed sandy and rocky coasts.
Rocky coasts shall be classed as one of the following three groups depending on their
geomorphic/geological features.
3.2.1 Hard rock coast
These coasts comprise hard, highly durable rock. They typically feature uniform slopes of a
relatively low gradient, often with boulders at the base and are relatively free from fractures.
Negligible shoreline change is expected over the planning timeframe.

13
Examples include the igneous/metamorphic headlands of Cape Naturaliste, Esperance, and the
Dampier Archipelagos.
3.2.2 Soft sedimentary rock coast
These coasts comprise relatively hard, strongly lithified, durable rock with distinct bedding
layers. They typically feature high, steep cliff faces, which may be undercut. Shoreline retreat is
generally slow and is caused by rock-falls or slab collapse.
Examples include the Kalbarri cliffs, Zuytdorp Cliffs (near Shark Bay), Broome, and the Great
Australia Bight
3.2.3 Weakly lithified sedimentary rock coast
These coasts comprise poorly cemented or semi-lithified, discontinuous, relatively soft or highly
weathered, weak rock. They typically feature low steep cliffs which are easily undercut often
forming wave cut platforms. Shoreline retreat is comparatively rapid compared to other types of
rocky coasts and generally occurs by slumping, rock-falls, or slab collapse.
Examples include the coastal limestone of the Perth Region and the Cape to Cape Region.
3.3 Mixed sandy and rocky coasts
Mixed sandy and rocky coasts shall be classed as one of the following three groups dependent on the
location and continuity of the rock. These coasts may be sensitive to small variations in climatic
conditions and often contain unstable/dynamic landforms.
3.3.1 Fringing reefs
These shorelines comprise offshore or near shore rock in the form of a reef or island which
results in a reduction in the wave energy reaching the shoreline. On sandy shorelines the wave
sheltering often results in a bulge (salient) in the shoreline towards an offshore reef or island.
Examples include Shoalwater Bay (Perth), Lancelin, Horrocks, and Port Gregory.
3.3.2 Rocky platforms
These coasts comprise a continuous subtidal or intertidal rock platform overlain by
unlithified/unconsolidated sediments. The rock platform is often created as the result of the
historic retreat/ erosion of a rocky shoreline. In many locations a sandy beach overlays the
platform to form a perched beach. These are commonly backed by a remnant sand dune.
Examples include Robert Point (Mandurah), and Leighton to Mudarup Rocks (Cottesloe, Perth),
Greenhead, Leeman.
3.3.3 Discontinuous rocky shorelines
These coasts comprise discontinuous subtidal or intertidal rock on a predominantly sandy
shoreline. The subtidal rock may be present as a pavement or discontinuous outcrops of reef
close to the shore.
Examples include the bay beaches Trigg Point to Sorrento (Perth), North Head to Sandy Cape
(Jurien), and Drummonds Cove (Geraldton).

14
3.4 Coastal lowlands
Coastal lowlands typically feature flat to gently sloping shores often containing high percentages of finer
sediments. In contrast to sandy coasts the landforms are generally the result of the historic geologic
advance of a deltaic or outwash plain. The near shore environment often comprises tidal flats, salt
marshes or mangroves. In many locations where there is an availability of sediments, a chenier plain or
storm ridge may be present. These shorelines are strongly influenced by inundation and tidal processes.
Examples include the deltaic landforms of the Ashburton River (Onslow), Gascoyne (Carnarvon) and the
outwash plains of Wooramel (Shark Bay), and Yannarie (Exmouth Gulf).
3.5 Tidal reaches of inland waters
Tidal reaches of inland waters are inland water bodies which are predominantly controlled by coastal
related processes, particularly tides and fluctuations in sea level. They include river mouths and estuaries
and generally comprise flat to gently sloping shores often containing high percentages of finer sediments.
These shorelines are strongly influenced by inundation and tidal processes.
Examples include the non-deltaic coastal lagoons of the southwest, Princess Royal Harbour (Albany),
Oyster Harbour (Albany), Peel-Harvey Estuary and the Swan Estuary.
3.6 Islands
Islands typically comprise a combination of sandy and rocky coasts. Examples include Rottnest Island,
Garden Island, the Houtman Abrolhos, and the Dampier Archipelago.
4. Calculation of the coastal processes
The site specific coastal foreshore reserve width to allow for coastal processes should be calculated based
on the coastal classification, and should consider each of the factors listed for that coastal type.
The study area for the calculation of the coastal processes should be defined based on the coastal
geology/geomorphology. The study area should include the entire sediment cell and extend to include
adjacent coastal areas as required to define the coastal processes at the development site. Macro-level
land use planning such as regional plans and strategies, should be extended to include the entire coastal
compartment.
The values given for each factor should be based upon the best available data and be a conservative
estimate of that factor and include allowance for uncertainty. As knowledge improves, the WAPC in
consultation with and agreement of the Department of Planning will update the values and methods.
More detail and advice on the factors and the models used to calculate the value given for each factor can
be obtained from the Department of Transport’s Manager, Coastal Management.
4.1 Climate change
Climate change will cause variations in many environmental variables including mean sea level, ocean
currents and temperature, wind climate, wave climate, rainfall/run-off and air temperature. Consideration
of changes in other key environmental variables should be included as knowledge improves, and where
relevant as part of Coastal Hazard Risk Management and Adaptation Planning or any other assessment of
coastal hazards undertaken in accordance with the policy requirements.
The allowance for sea level rise should be based on a vertical sea level rise of 0.9 metres over a 100-year
planning timeframe to 2110.

15
4.2 Horizontal shoreline datum
The horizontal shoreline datum should define the active limit of the shoreline under storm activity, and
should be determined against the physical and biological features of the coast. In most instances it should
be defined as the seaward shoreline contour representing the peak steady water level under storm activity
resulting from the storm defined in section 5.
4.3 Coastal protection works
Development that benefits from protection from coastal hazards by formal coastal protection works
should be determined on a case by case basis with the allowance for coastal processes taking into account
the works in question.
4.4 Allowance for erosion on sandy coasts
On a sandy coast the allowance for erosion should be measured from the HSD and calculated as the sum
of the factors: S1 Erosion; S2 Erosion; and S3 Erosion plus 0.2 metres per year allowance for uncertainty.
4.4.1 (S1 Erosion) Allowance for the current risk of storm erosion
The allowance for absorbing the current risk of erosion should be based on the calculation of the
maximum cross-shore storm erosion with consideration of the maximum longshore storm
erosion. The cross-shore erosion should be determined using a credible sediment transport
model appropriate for the subject location. When a model is used it should be run for three
successive storm events and the distance should be the recession from the HSD to the land
extent of the storm erosion as calculated by the model. In the absence of modelling a minimum
value of 40 metres should be used to allow for cross-shore erosion coastal erosion on a typical
sandy coast.
Consideration should be given to longshore erosion, especially where there may be a
gradient/transition in longshore erosion during a storm. This may be caused by an obstacle
(natural or manmade) which reduces updrift longshore sediment transport and is common on the
tidal reaches of inland waters, sheltered embayments and gulfs.
Steeply sloping sandy coasts may also be subject to coastal recession as a result of slope failure.
This may be the result of undercutting by storm erosion, changes in groundwater conditions or
loading at the top of the slope. For steeply sloping sandy coasts the distance for absorbing the
current risk of erosion should extend to the crest of the stable post storm shoreline slope. In the
absence of a geological assessment the stable slope profile for a typical sandy shoreline should
be 30 degrees from the horizontal.
4.4.2 (S2 Erosion) Allowance for historic shoreline movement trends
The allowance for historic shoreline movement trends should be based on the review of
available shoreline records. Aerial photography has been collected for the majority of the coast
at about five-yearly intervals since around the 1950s and should be used to determine the
historic position of the shoreline. In some locations historic beach and bathymetric surveys may
exist and should also be used.
Consideration should be given to the cause of shoreline movement trends. Trends should be
derived from shoreline movement time series and may include continuous erosion or accretion;
erosion followed by accretion or visa-versa; longshore evolution of features; or shoreline
rotation.
The allowance for historic shoreline movement trends should generally be calculated as 100
times the historic annual rate of erosion.
Where the historic annual rate of shoreline movement is accretion less than 0.2 metres per year
the allowance for historic shoreline movement trends should be zero. Where the historic annual
rate of shoreline movement is continuous accretion in excess of 0.2 metres per year and there is

16
compelling evidence that accretion is likely to continue at the same rate for at least the next 50
years the allowance for historic shoreline movement trends should be calculated as minus 50
times the historic longer-term annual rate of accretion.
Where mobile dune systems exist, they should be included in the coastal foreshore reserve
width, with a provision for dune migration calculated as 100 times the annual historic movement
rate.
The coastal foreshore reserve width shall include the greatest of that calculated as a result of
shoreline movement or dune migration.
4.4.3 (S3 Erosion) Allowance for erosion caused by future sea level rise
The allowance for erosion caused by future sea level rise on sandy coast should be calculated as
100 times the adopted sea level rise value of 0.9m over a 100-year timeframe or 90 metres.
Consideration should be given to increasing the allowance where the impact of obstacles
(natural or manmade) may influence future trends by reducing updrift longshore sediment
transport.
4.5 Allowance for erosion on rocky coasts
On the majority of rocky coasts the rate of coastal erosion is relatively slow. The allowance for the
current and future risk of erosion should be based on a geotechnical assessment of the shoreline stability.
The geotechnical assessment should include consideration of: slope elevation, slope angle, durability of
material, consistency of material, angle of bedding layers and thickness of bedding layers.
4.6 Allowance for erosion on mixed sandy and rocky coasts
4.6.1 Allowance for erosion on fringing reefs
The allowance for erosion on coasts with fringing reefs should generally be determined using the
methods specified for sandy coasts. Where a dynamic landform is present, such as a salient, the
coastal foreshore reserve width should include allowance for the fluctuation or reduction/loss of
the landform.
The allowance for erosion caused by future sea level rise should include consideration of the
potential reduction in wave attenuation by reef and the resulting impacts on shoreline stability.
4.6.2 Allowance for erosion on rocky platforms
The allowance for erosion on rocky platforms should be determined on a case-by-case basis. The
allowance should be evaluated following a geotechnical assessment of the platform which
should include consideration of: elevation, width, angle and durability and consistency of
material.
4.6.3 Allowance for erosion on discontinuous rocky coasts
The allowance for erosion on discontinuous rocky coasts should generally be determined using
the methods specified for sandy coasts. Particular consideration however, should be given to
how a rocky outcrop may act as an obstacle to updrift longshore sediment transport.
4.7 Allowance for erosion on coastal lowlands
The allowance for erosion on coastal lowlands should generally be determined using the methods
specified for sandy coasts,; rocky coasts; and mixed sandy and rocky coasts. However consideration
should be given to potential changes in the landform.

17
4.8 Allowance for erosion on tidal reaches of inland waters
The allowance for erosion on tidal reaches of inland water should generally be determined using the
methods specified for sandy, rocky, and mixed sandy and rocky coasts. It is however, acknowledged that
these methods are principally derived for open ocean coast and case-by-case consideration should be
given to the variation in underlying coastal processes and driving forces within sheltered inland waters.
4.9 Allowance for erosion on islands
Acknowledging that for most islands the allowance would preclude development, variation should be
considered on a case-by-case basis.
4.10 Allowance for storm surge inundation on all coasts
The allowance for inundation should be the maximum extent of inundation calculated as the sum of S4
Inundation plus the predicted extent of sea level rise.
Where the identified inundation is not contained within a foreshore reserve (Policy measure 5.9 (i)),
coastal hazard risk management and adaptation planning (Policy measure 5.5) should be undertaken.
4.10.1 (S4 Inundation) Allowance for the current risk of storm surge inundation
The allowance for the current risk of inundation should be the maximum extent of storm
inundation, defined as the peak steady water level plus wave run-up. Where inundation is halted
by a coastal barrier (natural or manmade) consideration should be given to the stability of the
barriers and whether the barrier may be breached or bypassed during a storm event over the
planning period.
Where a continuous barrier dune is present the capacity of the dune to provide protection from
inundation should be assessed based on the cross-sectional area of the dune. If the dune reserve,
the cross-sectional area of the dune above the peak steady water level, is less than 100 cubic
metres, it should be assumed that the dune will be removed during storm activity and the
maximum extent of storm inundation should be calculated without the dune.
On low permeability/impermeable coasts where wave run-up can result in wave overtopping, the
coastal foreshore reserve width for this coastal process should be the maximum extent of wave
overtopping.
5. Definition of the storm event
The selection of the storm event for determining the allowance for the current risk of erosion and
inundation is dependent on the coastal area (Figure 1).
The allowance for the current risk of erosion should be based on a tropical cyclone storm event for areas
one and two and a mid-latitude depression or extra-tropical low storm event for areas three and four.
The storm event for erosion and accretion should be based on ocean forces and coastal processes, which
have a one percent or one-in-one hundred probability of being equalled or exceeded in any given year
over the planning timeframe.
The allowance for the current risk of inundation should be based on a tropical cyclone storm event for
areas one, two and three; and a mid-latitude depression or extra-tropical low storm event for area four.
The storm event for storm surge inundation should be based on ocean forces and coastal processes that
have a 0.2 percent or one-in-five hundred probability of being equalled or exceeded in any given year
over the planning time frame.
Storm events will vary for each location and should be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. The path for the
storm event should be determined so as to maximise the associated erosion and inundation. To assist in
the determination of tropical cyclonic storm events the relative scales, central pressures and worst-case

18
paths derived from historic records are available for the majority of locations. Non-tropical cyclonic
storm events for coastal areas three and four should be based on recorded storm events and are available
for the majority of locations.
Figure 1: Coastal areas
5.1 Sheltered coasts
Some sections of the coast are sheltered from the direct impacts of offshore storm events. This may be as
they form part of the tidal reaches of inland waterways or due to the presence of offshore islands/reefs.
For these locations the storm event should be defined on a case-by-case basis either by the transformation
of the offshore storm event or, for fetch limited locations, the hindcasting of an equivalent storm event
based on recorded or modelled winds.
6. Tsunamis
An allowance for absorbing the current risk of inundation should be based on maximum inundation
heights evidenced in tsunami prone areas.

19
7 Variations
It is recognised that in the circumstances described below development may need to occur within an area
identified to be potentially impacted by physical coastal processes within the planning time frame. Such
development should always be considered within a coastal hazard risk management and adaptation
planning process and should only proceed once adequate management and adaptation planning measures
have been agreed, and which accord with the Avoid – Planned or Managed Retreat - Accommodate –
Protect hierarchy stipulated in the policy General Measures.
7.1 Public recreation facilities with finite lifespan
Development with an expected useful lifespan of less than 30 years for public recreation purposes on the
proviso that the development is to be removed or modified should it be threatened by erosion or creates
an erosion threat to other land. Such development may include for example minor car parks for coastal
recreational users; recreational amenities such as public ablutions; barbeque/picnic/shade areas;
playground and other recreational equipment; infrastructure for public safety; and pedestrian access
structures such as ramps, stairs and paths.
7.2 Coastally dependent and easily relocatable development
Temporary, easily relocatable structures that are demonstrably coastally dependent. Such structures may
include for example fencing, for the purposes of protecting dunes and ecologically sensitive areas; sun
shades; and facilities for public events.
7.3 Department of Defence
Department of Defence operational installations that require foreshore location.
7.4 Industrial and commercial development
Industrial and commercial development that is demonstrably dependent on a foreshore location. Such
development may include, for example, marinas for tourism and recreational boating facilities, cage
based aquaculture operations, and port facilities.
7.5 Coastal nodes
The need for the provision of coastal nodes on the coast is recognised and should provide for a range of
facilities to benefit the broader public. Such nodes may be developed within the coastal foreshore reserve
but should only be located where identified in a strategic plan. Nodes should be located on stable areas;
should have no negative impacts on the adjacent environment; and should avoid areas of high natural
landscape or resource value.
7.6 Surf lifesaving clubs
Where there is a demonstrable need for coastal surf life saving club facilities including surf life saver
lookouts in the public interest, preference should be given to clubs that are identified in a strategic plan
and co-located with other facilities such as those described in sections 7.1 and 7.5.
Development that falls within the above general possible variations will be assessed on a case-by-case
basis against the policy measures in Section 5 and in consultation with other relevant agencies and
community as considered appropriate.
Development that is dependent upon location on the coast but which would not require a direct interface
with tidal areas or placement in the foreshore – such as resort developments or tank based aquaculture –
permanent infrastructure services and facilities such as sewerage pumping stations, drainage,
communications, energy and water operation are not included in these possible variations.