Operational
Policy 1.11
Community schemes
June 2021
The Western Australian Planning Disclaimer © State of Western Australian website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
C t t p w w r h o a a h i i l s m s d l o t f i l t o m a a a i n n l o r l i e o d s d n s w . w a p i o l W i r i o t n n e h e w s a t e u p h n c n s a k e e t y n t i r , r o s o t o f d h a w o u a e n o r l y i d e t r r , s d e d a c t s g e n u e p e p d s s e s c t s c o t e . t h t d h n o t i e d o a s a n e E n s l w t d o s h e f o rs T P a a n a d n h l o r a e d i v t n s s i l c n o i d u a e i n o l n b t e c t g l o e x u h f p C m e f a o r o b e c e r m t s a n a i s s o m t n e i n s h y d i s a t t d s o h a s i a r a k o b m t e i n e m n t . a e h A p g n o e l n e r i p G e y n o u d o o r r b e v i t l n l p o e i t s r s r a t h n e s h k e s m e i w e s d n e n h p , b n t a u a a y t t s b t , s t i o i l t o h t i h c e s n e e a v e , W t e c s m io r t a e a p n w s s t e l t e h i o e s m m i y r c m n e a h e e a y n A m s d t u b , a e a s e o n t y , i p r n d i a o n i n l g a c i r a g i c o e o n u e o s n r n p d o a t e f s s r c a a t it r h e P W G 1 Pe 4 u o e r 0 b r s t d l h t W i e o s W h r i n l n l e A i S a d A t m 6 e u b 0 p s y S 0 t h t r 0 t a r e h e l n e i e a s t n o n P l H a o n u n s in e g Commission e t f N a e m a x l: t : a i 0 0 o i 8 l 8 n : i 6 a 6 n 5 l 5 f R 5 o 5 1 e @ 1 l 8 a d 9 y 0 p 0 0 S 0 lh 2 e 1 . r w v a ic .g e o : 1 v 3 .a 3 u 6 77
of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred to Locked Bag 2506 This document is available in
herein. Professional advice should be obtained before applying the Perth WA 6001 alternative formats on application to
information contained in this document to particular circumstances. the Communications Branch.
Publication date: June 2021
Operational date: June 2021
Content last reviewed: June 2021

Operational Policy
Operational
Policy 1.11
Community schemes
Contents
1. Policy intent 1 5.2 Extension of the development period 8
Waiver of other requirements relating
2. Application of this operational policy 1
to plans or instruments 9
3. Community schemes in Western Australia 1
6. Implementation 9
3.1 Statement of Grounds and Community
Development Statement 2 6.1 Community development statement 9
Procedures 9
4. Policy objectives 3
Manner and form of a community
5. Policy measures 4 development statement 10
5.1 General requirements 4
Assessment of a community
Level of detail 5 development statement 10
Application of the Residential Timeframes 10
Design Codes 5
Public consultation 10
Subdivision and development 5
Determination 11
Staging 5
Amendment to community
Infrastructure, utilities and servicing 6 development statement 11
Infrastructure contributions 6
6.2 Right of review 12
Environmental characteristics 7
Cease to have effect 12
Public open space 7
6.3 Subdivision 12
Movement network 8
6.4 Development 13
Historical heritage 8
Aboriginal heritage 8

Operational Policy 1.11
1
Community schemes
1. Policy intent 2. Application of this 3. Community schemes
operational policy in Western Australia
This policy sets out the general principles and basic
requirements that will be used by the Western
Australian Planning Commission (WAPC) to: This policy applies to applications for community Community schemes is an opt-in form of
development statements, including the statement subdivision that can apply throughout Western
• clarify the procedure for assessing and
of grounds, to facilitate implementation of the CT Australia. Land may be subdivided by a community
determining a statement of grounds and
Act through subdivision and development of single scheme if, in accordance with section 7(1) of the CT
community development statement; and
freehold lots held in fee simple within Western Act:
• establish criteria for the consideration of a Australia.
• it comprises the whole of a parcel of land; and
community development statement and the
subsequent subdivision and development The policy is complemented by the full range • the parcel of land is freehold land held in fee
proposals. of policies under State Planning Policy 1 State simple and comprised in a single certificate of
Planning Framework that are concerned with title under the Transfer of Land Act 1893; and
as provided for by the Community Titles Act 2018 the more detailed aspects of lot creation and • the parcel of land is not already subdivided by
(CT Act) and the Community Titles Regulations development for particular land uses. a strata title scheme under the Strata Titles Act
2021 (the Regulations). The general principles should be read in 1985; and
conjunction with the relevant use-specific policy
• the parcel of land is not a caravan park or
to give a comprehensive coverage of the WAPC’s
camping ground within the meanings given in
policy requirements for any land use.
the Caravan Park and Camping Grounds Act
1995.
This policy shall be applied in conjunction with the
Community Schemes Guidelines (the Guidelines).
Subdivision in the form of a community scheme
allows for up to three tiers of schemes to be
created within a single scheme. One community
development statement will guide all tier schemes.
Unlike strata titles schemes under the Strata Titles
Act 1985, the linking of multiple tiers to the original
tier 1 scheme allows for separate, autonomous
community titles subdivision to occur, while being
linked through the parent lot.
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
2
Community schemes
There are two types of community titles schemes: As part of an application for approval of a The content and level of detail provided in a
community development statement, the applicant community development statement should be
• community titles (land) schemes; and
is required to provide a statement of grounds. appropriate to support the proposed community
• community titles (building) schemes.
This shall be provided as the executive summary scheme and subsequent subdivision and
of the community development statement. development applications, where appropriate.
These can exist within the same community
Further detail is provided in section 5 of this policy.
scheme to provide for a mix of development types
The WAPC must determine the statement of
and forms.
grounds and the community development The effect a community development statement
statement together. has on planning approvals is set out in section 19 of
The CT Act introduces a new planning
the CT Act. This section affords a weight or binding
instrument for community schemes, a community
A statement of grounds must identify why effect to the community development statement,
development statement. The intent of the
subdivision by a community scheme is an according to the application type and timing of its
community development statement is to guide the
appropriate form of subdivision for the land. submission.
subdivision and development of land, including
That is, why the form of subdivision is appropriate
the proposed staging and sequencing of the 1. Generally, a community development
compared to any other form, such as green title,
subdivision and development. statement is binding on a subdivision
strata or survey-strata.
application during:
A community development statement must be
A community development statement will i. the Approval Period. This is the period
approved by the WAPC prior to the approval of
define how the subject land may be subdivided between the WAPC issuing approval of
a proposed tier 1 subdivision. Once approved,
and developed. The community development a community development statement
its effect on planning approvals varies according
statement is to address matters outlined in section and it being registered with the tier 1
to the type of application made and when it is
25 of the CT Act, including the following: subdivision. This period can last for a
made. In some cases, a community development
• how the subject land may be subdivided and maximum of four years. Applications
statement has a binding effect on planning
developed; and must be approved if consistent with the
approvals, while at others it is to be paid due
community development statement.
regard. This is set out in section 19 of the CT Act. • number of tiers proposed; and
ii. the Development Period. This is a 10-year
• number of lots proposed at each tier; and
period following registration of the tier 1
3.1 Statement of grounds and • whether each scheme is a community titles scheme plan (which may be extended).
(building) scheme or community titles (land)
community development • Applications made any time before
scheme; and
the final four years of the Development
statement
• staging; and
Period must be approved if consistent
• other matters as outlined in regulation 13 of with the community development
The WAPC is responsible for determining whether
the Regulations, and the Guidelines, to the statement.
a community scheme is an appropriate form of
satisfaction of the WAPC.
subdivision for a parcel of land.
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
3
Community schemes
• Applications made in the final four 4 Policy objectives 4.6 To ensure that all development is
years of the Development Period must complemented by adequate, well-located
not be approved if inconsistent with the areas of public open space that will enhance
4.1 To ensure that a community development
community development statement. the amenity of the development and provide
statement will facilitate subdivision and
for the recreational needs of the locality.
development that achieves orderly and
Once the Development Period has ended, a
proper planning and is consistent with 4.7 To ensure the timely, equitable and
community development statement is to be
planning frameworks and procedures. coordinated delivery of community
given due regard when considering subdivision
infrastructure and facilities for land subject
applications. 4.2 To ensure that a community development
to a community scheme, and the broader
statement is responsive to the characteristics
locality.
2. A community development statement is of the site, including environmental features,
binding on a development application: sustainability principles and the local planning
context.
i. During the Development Period,
applications must not be approved 4.3 To ensure that movement within, around
if inconsistent with the community and through a community scheme
development statement. reflects appropriate transport standards
for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles in
ii. At all other times the community
accordance with the existing locality.
development statement is to be given due
regard for development applications. 4.4 To ensure that a community development
statement appropriately identifies the
In determining a statement of grounds and provision of public utilities and infrastructure,
community development statement, the WAPC connecting with the broader locality and
must have regard to matters outlined in section existing networks, in a timely manner.
23 of the CT Act, the Regulations, the existing
4.5 To promote a sense of place and conservation
planning framework, State planning policies,
of places of Aboriginal and historical heritage
local planning schemes and interim development
significance in accordance with the existing
orders.
locality.
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
4
Community schemes
5 Policy measures 5.1.3 It is noted that the application of For example, where the local planning
community scheme legislation does scheme establishes a 10 metre building
not remove a landowner/applicant’s setback, and the approved community
5.1 General requirements obligations under other legislation, development statement establishes
for example, the Environmental Protection a 7 metre setback, a 6 metre setback
5.1.1 In its consideration of a community
Act 1986 or Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972. proposed at development application
development statement and amendments
would not be considered consistent and
to a community development statement, 5.1.4 Further to section 5.1.1 of this policy,
would not be supported.
the WAPC will apply the following criteria: a community development statement
must be consistent with the planning 5.1.5 A community development statement
a) The proposed community scheme
framework. Minor variation will only be cannot be used to permit a land use,
is in accordance with all relevant
considered where the local planning development or density that is otherwise
provisions of the local planning
scheme provides for variation and prohibited or not provided for by the local
scheme.
objectives of the scheme are satisfied. planning scheme.
b) Subdivision by community scheme is
consistent with long-term planning Where minor variation is proposed, the 5.1.6 It is the WAPC preference that
goals and objectives for the locality. WAPC would assess whether the variation development is undertaken on a site prior
is consistent with the intent and objectives to applying for a community development
c) The proposal is consistent with the
of the planning framework for that locality. statement.
policies of the WAPC regarding
subdivision and development, and
The same flexibility afforded to the 5.1.7 Where a proposed community
in particular, the standards for roads,
planning framework will be applied to the development statement incorporates/
public open space and residential
community development statement and reflects a development provision for
design.
will be at the discretion of the decision development which has been approved
maker. by the Joint Development Assessment
5.1.2 In order to satisfy itself with respect to
Panel or State Development Assessment
these matters, the WAPC may require
Where minor variations are approved in
Unit, these provisions would be
the submission of technical reports and/
a community development statement,
considered to be consistent with the local
or concept or sketch plans showing a
then these variations become binding
planning framework. This is because a
form of development which complies
for subdivision and development. This
valid development approval exists for
with all relevant development standards
means that further discretion to these
the subject land, for which due regard
and requirements. The WAPC may also
varied provisions will not be considered at
would have been given to the planning
undertake consultation with other affected
subdivision or development application
framework during the assessment of the
bodies.
stage.
application.
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
5
Community schemes
Level of detail Application of the Residential Design Codes are considered, for example, onsite
effluent disposal (where proposed),
5.1.8 The level of detail proposed in a 5.1.9 Where reference is made to the
tree retention, cut and fill;
community development statement in application of the Residential Design
relation to development provisions will Codes for a community scheme, an • the community scheme connects and
determine the future flexibility afforded to applicant may choose to apply a provides for the integration with the
subsequent subdivision and development performance based approach, however it existing or anticipated locality;
on the subject land. would need to be within the parameters • adaptable reuse and parking
of the community development statement. provisions are accommodated to
That is, the more specific the provision
That is, any specified requirements (e.g. ensure that development provided
provided in the community development
minimum parking standards, building can cater for changing trends; and
statement, the less flexibility there will be
envelopes) would need to be achieved
to exercise discretion at subdivision and • each tier and/or stage of subdivision
through the application of a performance
development stages. is compliant with the planning
based approach.
framework and does not conflict with
If the applicant wants to deviate from the or undermine a valid approval.
Subdivision and development
details approved, this may warrant an
amendment to a community development 5.1.10 Where subdivision and/or development To ensure infrastructure and servicing is delivered,
statement. provisions are proposed as part of a appropriate conditions will be applied to each
community development statement, the stage of subdivision and/or development.
5.1.9 The level of detail provided in a
community development statement shall, This will be influenced/determined by the staging
community development statement will
in accordance with the applicable zone, and sequencing provisions provided in the
also vary depending on the complexity of
density and planning framework that community development statement.
the scheme and/or whether development
exists over the subject land, demonstrate
has already been undertaken on the Based on the provisions provided in a community
that:
subject land. development statement, appropriate conditions
• the subject land is capable of
will be applied to each stage of subdivision or
The level of detail provided needs to be subdivision and development taking
development applications.
sufficient for the owners or occupiers to into account any site, environmental
understand the level of development or soil characteristics, and whether Staging
proposed, and their entitlements. the sites are appropriately serviced.
This may be demonstrated through 5.1.11 The community scheme staging plan
indicative lot layout or building should show each tier and the ultimate
envelopes. This is to ensure that development outcome sought for the
any factors required to implement subject land. This may include the
the subdivision or development provision of temporary infrastructure until
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
6
Community schemes
such time as further development occurs, terminated. An entire community ceding of land and contributions
such as temporary road or bushfire access scheme may also be terminated. In either to facilitate the provision of traffic
routes or temporary water pump stations, instance, consideration needs to be given signals; and
pending subsequent subdivision and in the community development statement
c) identify the staging of infrastructure
permanent infrastructure provision. to the ongoing provision or maintenance
required at each tier or stage
of infrastructure if its proposed to be
of subdivision, to cater for the
5.1.12 Given the potential for three tiers to be
transferred to the local government.
proposed development; for
developed over an extended timeframe,
example, temporary and permanent
the WAPC will generally require the The WAPC may require an amendment to
infrastructure.
ceding of land, provision of infrastructure, the community development statement
or contribution towards land and/ where community titles schemes or tiers
5.1.17 The WAPC requires that each new lot
or infrastructure as part of the tier 1 within a community scheme are being
is provided with an acceptable level of
subdivision, to facilitate a more timely and terminated.
utility services, provided either by a public
equitable approach to development of
or a licensed private service provider.
the scheme. This should be demonstrated Infrastructure, utilities and servicing
The level and standard of these will be
as part of a staging plan.
5.1.16 The community development statement determined by the WAPC in the context
5.1.13 Consultation with servicing agencies is should: of the intended use, the size of the lot,
soil conditions, provisions of planning
recommended at the earliest possible a) identify the required infrastructure,
scheme, and the Government Sewerage
stage when preparing a community utilities and servicing needed to
Policy 2019, together with the provisions
development statement to determine accommodate the community
of any other published policy that may be
staging and servicing delivery. scheme which may include
relevant.
opportunities for enhancing the
5.1.14 Staging requirements may be enforced
efficiency and effectiveness of
and monitored through the imposition Infrastructure contributions
existing infrastructure within the
of conditions on subdivision and
immediate locality; 5.1.18 The community development statement
development applications. Subdivision
should require that contributions or the
or development applications may not be b) demonstrate the provision of onsite
ceding of land is provided with the tier 1
determined or endorsed if conditions are public or strategic infrastructure,
subdivision. Where land is to be ceded, it
not satisfied. land to accommodate infrastructure,
may be either transferred to the Crown at
or contributions to infrastructure,
5.1.15 It is acknowledged that community titles to facilitate the subdivision and that time or be the subject of a separate
schemes or tiers within a community development of the land, for example legal agreement which ensures the
scheme may be terminated without transfer of a site at some future nominated
the entire community scheme being time.
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
7
Community schemes
In limited circumstances the WAPC may • identify proposed measures, 5.1.23 The WAPC may decide to take cash in
consider the ceding of land at subsequent including, but not limited to; lieu of setting aside land on advice from
stages of the community scheme subject requirements for appropriate the local government. It is recommended
to: protection, enhancement, that an applicant liaise with the WAPC and
remediation, buffers and local government early in the application
– justification for delayed delivery, and
management of environmental process to understand their public open
– a detailed staging plan being
features such as wetlands, significant space obligations.
included within the community
trees for retention or management of
development statement clearly stating 5.1.24 Obligations for contributions or land
onsite water courses and air quality.
what contributions will be provided required to be ceded for public open
and when, and 5.1.21 The management of environmental space are to be met entirely at the tier 1
features including retention, ceding, subdivision stage.
– support from the local government,
revegetation or management, needs to be
public authority or service provider.
5.1.25 The WAPC may, in limited circumstances,
addressed in the staging plan.
agree to land being ceded at a tier 2 stage
5.1.19 Where infrastructure contributions are in
subject to:
place for the locality, in accordance with Public open space
State Planning Policy 3.6 Infrastructure – justification for delayed delivery, and
5.1.22 Public open space shall be provided for
Contributions (SPP 3.6) and the relevant
community schemes in accordance with – a detailed staging plan included in the
scheme provisions, they will be applied
Development Control Policy 2.3 Public community development statement
to each subdivision application within a
Open Space in Residential Areas (DC 2.3). clearly stating what land will be ceded
community scheme. The requirement
and when, and
for infrastructure to be provided to serve Open space retained as a lot or common
– support from the local government.
the subject land and the development property within a community scheme
proposed by the community scheme, is in may be considered to contribute towards 5.1.26 Public open space will be applied based
addition to any infrastructure contribution communal open space for the purposes of generally on the entire scheme area
requirements as applied under SPP 3.6. the Residential Design Codes. regardless of whether it will be community
titles (land) and/or community titles
Environmental characteristics Land that is not ceded to the Crown,
(building) lots. The WAPC may however
but is proposed to function as public
5.1.20 The community development statement consider excluding certain areas within the
open space will only be considered as a
should: community scheme from the public open
contribution in accordance with DC 2.3
space calculation if a contribution is not
• identify the environmental features; where it meets the design and function
triggered by a particular land use.
and of public open space and a public access
easement is put in place. This is to ensure
that access is provided to the public, in
perpetuity and without restriction.
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
8
Community schemes
5.1.27 The land to be used for public open space retained, where appropriate. This may be b) identify proposed measures
(whether ceded to the Crown or covered implemented through the use of public to protect significant natural,
by a public access easement) is to be access easements. Aboriginal and cultural features,
located to ensure public access will be including sites and features, cultural,
5.1.32 Where parking standards are to be
maintained. archaeological, ethnographic,
included in a community development
geological, geomorphological, visual
5.1.28 Where the WAPC considers it appropriate statement these standards shall be
or wilderness values.
due to the intensification of residential identified for the entire scheme. This may
development, the requirement for public be demonstrated and allocated through
open space may be applied to community the staging plan.
5.2 Extension of the
titles (building) schemes where the
5.1.33 Where the parking provisions of the Development Period
predominant use is for residential
local planning framework are proposed
purposes.
5.2.1 It is recommended that an applicant
to be varied or new standards applied,
apply for pre-lodgement advice with the
the applicant is to provide justification
Movement network
WAPC prior to lodging an application for
demonstrating that the car parking is
5.1.29 The street and lot layout shall be site sufficient. extension of the Development Period.
responsive, providing safe and efficient
5.2.2 When assessing an application to extend
movement for all modes of transport. Historical heritage
the Development Period, the WAPC will
5.1.30 Road, pedestrian and cycling facilities 5.1.34 The community development statement have regard to the following matters,
including end-of-trip facilities, shall be should: including but not limited to:
provided in accordance with the existing a) identify any site of significance and its • existing planning scheme provisions
planning framework or legislative value, and and State planning policies and how
requirements (e.g. Perth Parking they may have changed since the
b) identify proposed measures or
Management Act 1999). commencement of the Development
opportunities to rejuvenate, protect
Period;
5.1.31 The movement network shall connect and promote historical heritage
with the broader locality. Through the features or assets. • the extent of subdivision and
subdivision approval process where development already undertaken in
roads are proposed to be managed and Aboriginal heritage the community scheme; and
maintained by the tier corporation (as a • any valid existing subdivision and
5.1.35 The community development statement
lot or common property), it will need to be development approvals that are yet
should:
demonstrated how public access will be to be implemented.
a) identify any site of significance and its
value, and
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
9
Community schemes
5.2.3 Where the Development Period has 5.2.7 Where other plans or instruments are 6. Implementation
ended, the WAPC may consider whether required under a planning scheme, the
an amendment to the community WAPC will only consider waiving the
6.1 Community development
development statement is required, requirement to prepare an instrument
prior to consideration of an application where: statement
to extend the Development Period, in
• The community development
accordance with regulation 17. statement provides sufficient detail to Procedures
guide subdivision and development
5.2.4 In determining an application to extend 6.1.1 It is recommended that an applicant
of the site, and
the Development Period the WAPC apply for pre-lodgement advice with the
reserves the right to determine alternate • The area subject to the community WAPC prior to lodging an application for
timeframes than those proposed by the development statement covers the approval of a community development
applicant. entire area identified in the scheme statement.
that requires the preparation of an
Waiver of other requirements relating to instrument. 6.1.2 An application for approval of a
plans or instruments community development statement (or
amendment to a community development
5.2.5 In accordance with section 20 of the statement) must be made to the WAPC in
CT Act the WAPC may, by instrument accordance with section 21 of the CT Act.
in writing, waive requirements for That is, it must:
the preparation of particular plans or
• be completed on the application
instruments under a planning scheme
form; and
or interim development order for land
that is or is proposed to be divided by a • include a statement of grounds; and
community scheme. • refer to section 3 of this policy and
ensure the land is of a type not
5.2.6 Waiving of planning instruments
excluded from the application of the
will only be considered with or after
CT Act.
the determination of the community
development statement. 6.1.3 It is recommended that an applicant
liaise with the local government, public
authorities and utility service providers
ahead of the lodgement of an application
for a community development statement.
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
10
Community schemes
6.1.4 Any details or requirements of the • comments received during the 6.1.11 If a valid development approval exists
community scheme that need to be consultation period; and and works have significantly commenced
binding must be contained within the or are complete, the local government
• any other matter of relevance
body of the community development referral timeframe is 28 days. In all other
including, but not limited to, local
statement. Information provided in the instances the local government referral
policy or position statements
appendix should only support or justify timeframe is 42 days.
and technical advice and further
the community development statement.
information obtained from a local
6.1.12 During the referral period local
This means that minor alteration to the
government or referral agency.
governments will be required to advertise
appendix wouldn’t require an amendment
the community development statement
to the community development statement, 6.1.7 During the assessment of an application
for public comment (14 – 21 days) and to
unless the changes impact provisions (e.g. for a community development
provide a copy of all submissions received
timing of deliverables such as roads, retail statement or amendment, the WAPC
to the WAPC.
floor space, landscaping). may request additional information to
guide the consideration, assessment
6.1.13 Local government is not required to
Manner and form of a community or determination of a community
consider the submissions received as part
development statement development statement.
of their referral response.
6.1.5 A community development statement is to 6.1.8 If additional information is provided,
6.1.14 Subject to agreement with the applicant,
be prepared in accordance with sections further comment or technical advice may
additional time may be required in order
21 and 25 of the CT Act, the Regulations be sought from the local government.
to seek further information or technical
and the Guidelines.
advice in consideration of the proposal.
Timeframes
Assessment of a community
Public consultation
development statement 6.1.9 The WAPC has 120 days to assess and
determine a statement of grounds and a
6.1.15 The WAPC will advise the local
6.1.6 In considering whether subdivision by a community development statement.
government of the applicable timeframe
community scheme is an appropriate form
for which they must undertake public
of subdivision the WAPC must have due 6.1.10 This time period for assessment includes
consultation.
regard to: referral to the relevant local government(s)
(28 or 42 days, refer to section 6.1.11 • Where a proposed community
• relevant State planning policies;
of this policy) in which the proposal is development statement or
• planning schemes or interim located as well as public authority or utility amendment proposes to clarify or
development orders that have effect service providers (28 days). expand on the planning framework
in the locality in which the land is it will be advertised for public
situated; comment for a maximum of 21 days.
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
11
Community schemes
– In this instance, public comment of the community development statement. approval ceases to have effect, in
will be sought specifically in If the modifications are significant, a accordance with section 24(4) of the CT
relation to the appropriateness community development statement Act.
of the land being subdivided or amendment may be refused and a
6.1.20 Once approved the community
by a community scheme AND new application may be required to
development statement will be published
any provisions which propose to allow for referral to agencies and public
on the WAPC website.
clarify or expand on the planning consultation.
framework.
6.1.18 Modifications to a community Amendment to community development
• Where a proposed community
development statement that are statement
development statement or
considered minor in nature include:
amendment to a community 6.1.21 It is recommended that an applicant
development statement proposes • minor textual amendments which do apply for pre-lodgement advice with the
to adopt the existing planning not materially alter the intent of the WAPC prior to lodging an application
framework without alteration or if community development statement for approval of an amendment to a
development is complete, it will be • minor mapping changes which do community development statement.
advertised for public comment for a not materially alter the intent of the
6.1.22 An application to amend a community
maximum of 14 days. community development statement
development statement may be made to
– In this instance, public comment • modifications which do not adversely the WAPC at any time after a community
will be sought specifically in impact on the amenity of the locality development statement has been
relation to the appropriateness of or restrict the use and enjoyment of approved, regardless of whether the
the land being subdivided by a the land community development statement
community scheme. • modifications which do not impact on has been registered (i.e. during the
the provision of infrastructure (land, Development Period) or not.
Determination
infrastructure, contributions).
6.1.23 Where a subdivision or development
6.1.16 The WAPC may approve, approve subject Note: Supporting or technical information proposal is inconsistent with the
to conditions or refuse a community may need to be modified to support the community development statement, a
development statement or amendment. required modifications. determining authority may refuse an
application or may request a development
6.1.17 The WAPC may approve a community 6.1.19 Where a community development
or subdivision application be withdrawn,
development statement or amendment, statement is approved subject to
until such time as a community
subject to modification as a condition of modifications, if the modifications are not
development statement is amended to
approval, where the modifications are addressed or undertaken as directed,
remove any inconsistency.
minor in nature and do not materially or within the timeframe stipulated, the
impact on the provisions or overall intent community development statement Note: this may include proposals to terminate
all or part of a community scheme.
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
12
Community schemes
6.1.24 Where an amendment to a community 6.2 Right of review 6.2.4 In accordance with section 27(2) of the CT
development statement is proposed the Act, where an amendment to a community
6.2.1 The applicant can apply to the State
WAPC will assess it in the same manner development statement (that effects a
Administrative Tribunal for review of:
against the same policy provisions as a subdivision) is not registered within four
community development statement. • a decision to refuse a community years of the approval of the amendment
development statement to the community development statement
6.1.25 Where an amendment to the community
by the WAPC, the amendment will lapse.
• a decision to approve a community
development statement is approved
development statement subject to
during the Development Period, the 6.2.5 Where the Development Period has
conditions
WAPC will register the amendment with expired by more than six months and
the Registrar of Titles in accordance with • a decision to refuse to extend the where an application to extend the
regulation 18. Development Period of a community Development Period or an application
development statement to amend the community development
6.1.26 Once approved, the consolidated
statement has not been received, the
• a decision to extend the
community development statement will
WAPC may declare, on its own initiative,
Development Period (i.e. less time
be published on the WAPC website.
that the community development
than requested)
statement ceases to have effect, in
6.1.27 An approved amendment has 4 years to
• refusal to approve an amendment or
accordance with section 27(3) of the CT
be registered with a scheme plan, where it
repeal of planning scheme by-laws.
Act.
effects a subdivision.
6.2.2 An applicant may lodge a written notice
6.1.28 During the Approval Period, an approved
of default with the WAPC and make an
amendment to a community development 6.3 Subdivision
application to the State Administrative
statement does not extend the Approval
Tribunal in accordance with section 34 of
Period, which will remain as 4 years from 6.3.1 Following the approval of a community
the CT Act and Part 14 of the Planning and
the date of the approval of the community development statement by the WAPC an
Development Act 2005.
development statement. application may be made for approval to
subdivide within the community scheme
Cease to have effect
to create a community titles scheme.
6.2.3 In accordance with section 27(1) of the CT
6.3.2 The WAPC is the determining authority for
Act, where a tier 1 subdivision application
subdivision and the application is made
has not been determined and lodged
under the Planning and Development
with the Registrar of Titles for registration
Act 2005, with the normal process being
within four years of approval of the
applied. This includes referral to local
community development statement by
government, public authorities and utility
the WAPC, the community development
service providers as required.
statement will lapse.
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021

Operational Policy 1.11
13
Community schemes
6.3.3 The community development statement 6.4.2 A community development statement
is binding on subdivision proposals may reference any valid development
during the Approval Period and the approval.
Development Period (refer to section 3.1
of this policy). This means a subdivision
may not be approved if it is inconsistent
with the community development
statement.
6.3.4 As with the normal subdivision proposal,
appropriate consideration will be given
to relevant State and local planning
frameworks. It is acknowledged that
subdivision is required to be consistent
with the community development
statement at the time of determination,
however, if significant changes have
occurred to the planning framework since
the community development statement
has been determined the determining
authority may need to exercise discretion
as to how the proposal is to meet the
requirements.
6.4 Development
6.4.1 In addition to the community
development statement, when
considering an application for
development approval the provisions of
the Planning and Development Act 2005
(Part 10) are applied through the normal
development application process.
Western Australian Planning Commission – June 2021