Flood and Security Lighting
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP1.16
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 20 September 2016
Policy Objectives
To control the impacts of outdoor flood and security lighting on the amenity of adjoining properties
and the surrounding area.
Policy Scope
This policy relates to the installation of flood and security lighting within the City of Melville.
This policy does not apply to the lighting of private or public tennis courts as this is governed by Local
Planning Policy LPP3.4 Tennis Courts.
Notwithstanding the content of this policy, where a public authority (such as the City of Melville or
other agency), installs flood or security lighting on land zoned under LPS6, planning approval may
not be required pursuant to Section 6 of the Planning and Development Act 2005 as the work may
be considered a public work.
Definitions / Abbreviations Used in Policy
Flood Lighting
A broad beam of artificial light used to illuminate an area for a continuous period of time.
Security Lighting
A broad bean of artificial light activated by a motion sensor to illuminate an area for a temporary
period of time.
Suitably Qualified Lighting Consultant
A Member of the Illuminating Engineering Society of Australia and New Zealand or similar.
Changes to this document can only be made by the Responsible Officer via a System Improvement Request
Printed version is uncontrolled and valid only at the time of printing
©Copyright 2009 City of Melville Page 1 of 3

Policy Statement
On private property
(1) Planning approval is not required for the installation of flood or security lighting on privately
owned properties where the following are satisfied:
(a) The lighting is installed to comply with Australian Standard AS.4282 – Control of the
Obtrusive Effects of Outdoor Lighting (as amended) and so that the light emissions are
directed within the subject lot.
(b) In addition to (a) above, where flood lighting is to be installed on a property which
adjoins a residential property, a timer is to be installed to turn the flood lights off
between 9pm and 6am each day.
(c) Written confirmation from a suitably qualified lighting consultant to confirm that flood
and/or security lighting has been installed in compliance with (a) and (b) above will be
required upon the request of the City.
On property under the care and control of the City of Melville
(2) Planning approval is not required for the installation of flood and security lighting (excluding
flood lighting towers on reserves) on properties under the care and control of the City of
Melville where the following are satisfied:
(a) The security lighting is installed to comply with Australian Standard AS.4282 – Control
of the Obtrusive Effects of Outdoor Lighting (as amended) and so that the light
emissions are directed within the subject lot.
(b) In addition to (a) above, where flood lighting is to be installed on a property which
adjoins a residential property, a timer is to be installed to turn the flood lights off
between 9pm and 6am each day.
(c) Written confirmation from a suitably qualified lighting consultant to confirm that the
security lighting has been installed in compliance with (a) and (b) above will be
required upon the request of the City.
(3) Planning approval is required for the installation of all floodlights within reserves under the
care and control of the City of Melville. Applications for planning approval will be assessed
taking into account the following:
(a) The location of the proposed lighting towers in relation to the surrounding properties.
(b) Whether the light emissions are wholly contained within the subject lot and satisfy
Australian Standard AS.2560 – Sports Lighting.
(c) The hours the flood lighting is to be operated.
(d) The potential adverse impacts upon any adjoining residential properties.
Changes to this document can only be made by the Responsible Officer via a System Improvement Request
Printed version is uncontrolled and valid only at the time of printing
©Copyright 2009 City of Melville Page 2 of 3

References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No. 6
AS.4282 – Control of the Obtrusive Effects of Outdoor
Lighting
AS.2560 – Sports Lighting
Delegated Authority No: DA-020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Planning and Development Services Committee 19/03/1991
Reviews
Development and Neighbourhood Amenity Committee 14/11/2000 P00/1016
Ordinary Meeting of Council 15/03/2011 P11/3188
Ordinary Meeting of Council 19/08/2014 P14/3526
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/09/2016 P16/3718
Changes to this document can only be made by the Responsible Officer via a System Improvement Request
Printed version is uncontrolled and valid only at the time of printing
©Copyright 2009 City of Melville Page 3 of 3