Additional Development Exemptions
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP 1.17
Policy Owner: Director Planning Last Review Date: 21 February 2023
Policy Objectives
The objective of this policy is:
• To list additional development exemptions in accordance with Cl. 61 (1) 20 of the Planning
and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (The Regulations).
Policy Scope
This policy applies to patios, temporary development, dividing fences and demolition. Where a
proposal satisfies the criteria outlined in this policy, development approval is not required.
Development which otherwise satisfies the exemption criteria of Clause 61 of Schedule 2 of The
Regulations is likewise exempt from requiring development approvals.
Definitions / Abbreviations Used In Policy
Residential Design Codes (R-Codes)
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (the Regulations)
Policy Statement
Clause 61 of Schedule 2 of the Regulations, details the types of works and land uses which are
exempt from development approval. In accordance with section 20 of the table a local government
can specify works which are exempt from planning approval in a local planning policy in addition to
the exemptions listed in the Regulations. In relation to residential development, planning approval
is not required if the relevant deemed-to-comply provisions of the R-Codes are met unless the site
is affected by heritage considerations. Table 1 of this policy lists additional exemption criteria
where, if satisfied, development approval is not required.
Table 1 - Additional development exemptions
Category of work Criteria
Patios Patios which do not meet the deemed-to-
comply lot boundary setback criteria of
tables 1, 2a and 2b which are:
• A maximum wall height of 3.0m
above natural ground level;
• Set back from the street to comply
with Local Planning Policy LPP 3.1
Residential Development;
• Open on two or more sides;
• Open sided where they are located
adjacent to a common boundary;
• Not to cover more than two-thirds of
the primary outdoor living area; and
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 4/07/2023 1:33 PM Page 1 of 3
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Patios, including roofs, gutters and eaves,
may be located less than 1 metre from the
boundary subject to the total length being
compliant with the boundary wall provisions
of LPP 3.1 Residential Development. In
accordance with the R-Codes, patio posts
less than 450mm in dimension are not
considered to be a boundary wall.
Demolition Demolition of any building including single
house, grouped dwellings, multiple
dwellings and non-residential buildings,
where the structure(s) is/are not:
(i) located in a place that is entered in the
Register of Heritage Places under the
Heritage of Western Australia Act 1990; or
(ii) the subject of an order under the
Heritage of Western Australia Act 1990 Part
6; or
(iii) included on a heritage list prepared in
accordance with this Scheme; or
(iv) located within an area designated under
this Scheme as a heritage area; or
(v) the subject of a heritage agreement
entered into under the Heritage of Western
Australia Act 1990 section 29.
Dividing fences Dividing fences behind the street setback
line to a maximum height of 2.3m measured
from the approved natural ground level on
the higher property.
For this exemption to apply, confirmation of
neighbour consultation with, and agreement
from, the adjoining landowner is to be
provided to the City prior to the
commencement of development.
Note: the above criteria does not exempt
the need for approval and consultation with
the adjoining landowner under other acts
such as the Dividing Fences Act 1961.
Non residential development The following works to non-residential
properties are exempt from requiring
development approval:
• Replacing or altering roofing
materials on a building where there
is no change to the roof form and
pitch.
• The painting or application of render
on the external surface of any
building or structure.
• Adding, altering or replacing
external cladding materials on a
building where there is no change to
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 4/07/2023 1:33 PM Page 2 of 3
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

the building form including the
covering of existing windows.
Except where the place is -
i) Entered in the State Register of
Heritage Places’
ii) The subject of a Heritage Order;
or
iii) Included in the Heritage list.
External fixtures External fixtures which are not located on
the front elevation of a building.
Standard antennas and satellite dishes
installed on the roof or other parts of the
building which are not located on the front
elevation of a building.
Standard letterboxes comply with the
deemed-to-comply requirements of the R-
Codes and Council policy.
References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Procedures, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Directorate Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No.6
State Planning Policy 3.1 - Residential Design Codes
LPP 3.1 Residential Development
Delegated Authority No: DA – 020: Planning and Related Matters
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Ordinary Council Meeting 21 February 2023 UP23/4016
Ordinary Council Meeting 20 July 2021 P21/3934
Ordinary Council Meeting 16 March 2021 P21/3905
Ordinary Council Meeting 19 April 2016 P16/3702
Reviews
Ordinary Council Meeting 15 November 2016 P16/3727
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 4/07/2023 1:33 PM Page 3 of 3
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.