Greater Bunbury Region Scheme
The Greater Bunbury Region Scheme (GBRS) guides land use and provides the legal basis for planning in the Greater Bunbury region.
Last updated:
9 October 2025
Contents
Zones, reservations and special control areas
GBRS environmental review (August 2000)
GBRS amendments
GBRS amendments for public comment
GBRS amendments in progress
GBRS amendments finalised
Scheme text and policies
Establishment plans
This region stretches from Lake Preston in the north, Peppermint Grove Beach in the south, eastwards to Darling Scarp, and covers the City of Bunbury and the shires of Harvey, Dardanup and Capel.
The GBRS defines the future of land use, dividing it into zones and reservations. Local governments are required to provide detailed plans for their part of the region consistent with the GBRS.
Zones, reservations and special control areas
Show more
The GBRS divides land in the region into zones, reservations and special control areas that are shown on the scheme map.
Zones and reservations in the GBRS are broad categories. They are not precisely defined or limited. The following descriptions are a guide.
Zones
Urban
: to provide for residential development and associated local employment, recreation and open space, shopping, schools and other community facilities.
Urban deferred
: land suitable for future urban development. Various planning, servicing and environmental requirements need to be addressed before urban development can occur.
Regional centre
: the Bunbury central business district where commercial, civic, cultural, residential, service and administration serving the region are located.
Industrial deferred
: land suitable for future industrial development but where there are various planning, servicing and environmental requirements which need to be addressed before industrial development can take place.
Rural
: for the sustainable use of land for agricultural purposes, to assist in the conservation and the wise use of natural resources including water, flora, fauna and minerals. These areas can also provide a distinctive rural landscape unique to the region and accommodate carefully planned rural living developments.
Reservations
Regional open space
: to protect the natural environment, provide recreational opportunities and safeguard important landscapes to be enjoyed by the public.
Railway
: to provide for the passage of trains, the marshalling, maintenance and storage of rolling stock, and the transport of the public and freight by rail.
State forests
: to recognise state forests as an important part of the region.
Waterways
: to recognise permanently inundated inland and coastal lands below the high water mark, and existing and proposed water canals.
Port installations
: to provide for the current and future expansion needs of the Port of Bunbury.
Primary regional roads
: to provide a regional road network to accommodate current and future transport needs on roads declared under the Main Roads Act 1930.
Other regional roads
: to provide a regional road network to accommodate current and future transport needs on roads for which the planning responsibilities are shared between the WAPC and local government.
Public purposes
: to provide for public purpose, such as airports, hospital, schools and public utilities.
Special control areas
Special control areas
: to respond to issues such as the protection of public drinking water. Special scheme provisions apply to land within these areas. The GBRS has:
SCA No 1 – Water catchments
SCA No 2 – Kemerton industrial zone buffer area
SCA No 3 – Glen Iris service corridor buffer area
SCA No 4 – Wastewater treatment plant buffer area
GBRS environmental review (August 2000)
Show more
An environmental assessment of the Greater Bunbury Region Scheme (GBRS) in accordance with the Environmental Protection Authority's Instructions was undertaken. This environmental review focuses on those areas where the zonings proposed under the GBRS differ significantly (in environmental terms) from the existing zonings under the local government town planning schemes.
GBRS amendments
Show more
Below are active and recently finalised GBRS Amendments.
Copies of archived GBRS amendments are available on request.
Request archived GBRS amendments
How long does an GBRS amendment take?
In general, a major GBRS amendment usually takes 24 months to complete, depending on the environmental assessment process, the number of submissions and requests for hearings. The Western Australian Planning Commission (WAPC) will consider all submissions before making a recommendation to the Minister for Planning.
GBRS amendments for public comment
There's no GBRS amendment for public comment currently.
GBRS amendments in progress
GBRS Minor amendment 0044/57 - Department Of Parks & Wildlife, 'Visitor Gateway' Project Koombana Drive, Bunbury
GBRS Minor amendment 0051/57 - Various Lots Jubilee and Jeffery Roads Glen Iris
GBRS Minor amendment 0054/57 - Lot 29 Jeffrey Road, Glen Iris
GBRS amendments finalised
GBRS Amendment 0071/13 - Treendale East Development Area
GBRS Amendment 0070 (Standard) - Part Lot 65 South Western Highway, Glen Iris
GBRS Minor amendment 0069/57 – Treendale East Urban Expansion Area
GBRS amendment 0068/57 – Part Lot 70 Government Road, Roelands
GBRS Minor amendments 0067/57 - Lot 500 Wellington Mill Road, Wellington Mill
Scheme text and policies
Legislation, policies and other documents relating to the GBRS
.
Establishment plans
Leschenault Regional Park establishment plan
Preston River to Ocean Regional Park establishment plan
Sidebar
Amending the region planning schemes
Your property and planning region schemes
Provided by
Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage
Contact
Address:
140 William Street, PERTH WA 6000
Locked Bag 2506, Perth WA 6001
Telephone:
61 8 6551 8002
View all our contact information
Our regional offices
Print this page
Share
Facebook share
(Opens in a new tab/window)
X
(Opens in a new tab/window)
LinkedIn
(Opens in a new tab/window)
Copy URL