Coastal Local Planning Policy
Local Planning Policy
Responsible directorate: Planning and Community Development
Objective: To ensure that the City complies with Part 5 of State Planning Policy 2.6 – State
Coastal Planning Policy by advising current and future landowners of applicable coastal
hazard risk and requiring coastal hazard risk management and adaptation planning to
be undertaken where required.
1. Authority:
This policy has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2, of the deemed provisions
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 which allows the
local government to prepare local planning policies relating to planning and development within
the Scheme area.
2. Application:
This policy applies to all privately owned land identified by the City as being subject to coastal
hazard risk within the next 100 years.
3. Definitions:
The words and phrases set out in this policy shall have the same meaning as ascribed to them
in State Planning Policy 2.6 – State Coastal Planning Policy (SPP2.6).
4. Statement:
To ensure that:
a. proponents place notifications about coastal hazard risk on certificates of title when
undertaking development on land subject to coastal hazard risk;
b. coastal hazard risk management and adaptation planning is undertaken by proponents
prior to subdivision of larger areas of land subject to coastal hazard risk; and
Coastal 1

c. where deemed appropriate by the City, coastal hazard risk management and adaptation
planning is undertaken by proponents of larger scale developments on land subject to
coastal hazard risk.
5. Details:
5.1 Subdivision of land identified as being subject to coastal hazard risk:
a. Prior to the City supporting the subdivision of larger areas of land identified by the
City as being subject to coastal hazard risk within the next 100 years, coastal hazard
risk management and adaptation planning (CHRMAP) shall be undertaken by the
proponent in accordance with SPP2.6, and approved by the City of Joondalup and
Western Australian Planning Commission.
b. The City shall recommend to the Western Australian Planning Commission that any
subdivision approval involving land identified by the City as being subject to coastal
hazard risk within the next 100 years be subject to a condition requiring the
proponent to place the following notification on the certificate of title in accordance
with SPP2.6:
VULNERABLE COASTAL AREA - This lot is located in an area likely to be
subject to coastal erosion and/or inundation over the next 100 years.
5.2 Development of land identified as being subject to coastal hazard risk:
For larger areas of developed land identified by the City as being subject to coastal hazard
risk within the next 100 years, the City may require coastal risk hazard management and
adaption planning to be undertaken prior to any subdivision or development of the land.
In granting development approval on a lot identified by the City as being subject to coastal
hazard risk within the next 100 years, the City shall apply a condition requiring the
proponent to place the following notification on the certificate of title in accordance with
SPP2.6:
VULNERABLE COASTAL AREA - This lot is located in an area likely to be subject to
coastal erosion and/or inundation over the next 100 years.
5.3 Land purchase inquiries:
Where a lot is identified by the City as being subject to coastal hazard risk within the next
100 years, the City will include this information on any Land Purchase Inquiry made in
relation to that lot.
5.4 Structure Plans and Local Development Plans:
Structure plans and local development plans over land identified by the City as likely to be
subject to coastal hazards within the next 100 years, will be assessed against the
requirements of SPP2.6.
Coastal 2

Creation date: April 2017 (CJ055-04/17)
Formerly:
Amendments: CJ223-12/22
Last reviewed: December 2022 (CJ223-12/22)
Related documentation: • State Planning Policy 2.6 – State Coastal Planning Policy
• Planning and Development Act 2005
• Transfer of Land Act 1893
• City of Joondalup Coastal Vulnerability Maps
File reference: 105198
Coastal 3