Consulting Rooms Local Planning Policy
Responsible directorate: Planning and Community Development
Objectives:
• To provide development standards for consulting rooms that assist in facilitating appropriate
development in close proximity to local users of the facility.
• To ensure the location, design and siting of consulting rooms does not have a negative impact
on residential amenity by way of inappropriate built form, parking or traffic.
• To prevent the conglomeration of consulting rooms in residential areas.
1. Authority:
This policy has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2 of the deemed provisions
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 which allows the
local government to prepare local planning policies relating to planning and development within
the Scheme area.
2. Application:
This policy applies to all consulting rooms in the ‘Residential’ zone and the ‘Urban Development’
zone where the applicable structure plan applies the ‘Residential’ zone.
3. Definitions:
“consulting rooms” as defined by Local Planning Scheme No. 3, means premises used by no
more than 2 health practitioners at the same time for the investigation or treatment of human
injuries or ailments and for general outpatient care.
“health practitioner” as defined by Local Planning Scheme No. 3, means a medical doctor,
dentist, physiotherapist, radiologist, podiatrist, chiropractor, acupuncturist, naturopath or any
other health care staff generating their own independent patient load.
Consulting Rooms 1

4. Statement:
The location of consulting rooms within a residential area provides the opportunity for services to
be located close and accessible to the users of those facilities.
In considering applications for consulting rooms within residential areas, the location, siting and
design of the consulting room will be taken into consideration to ensure the development does
not have an adverse impact on the residential character and amenity of surrounding areas.
5. Details:
In assessing an application for development approval for consulting rooms, the following will be
considered.
5.1. Location:
a. In order to avoid the adverse cumulative impacts of non-residential development in a
residential area, a consulting room that would contribute to the concentration of
these uses along a street or located in close proximity to another consulting room will
generally not be supported.
b. Battle-axe lots or sites located at the head of cul-de-sacs should be avoided as they
limit the opportunity for the provision of car parking and can cause traffic issues due
to the concentration of activity.
5.2. Building setbacks and fencing:
a. Building setbacks and fencing are to be in accordance with the requirements of the
Residential Design Codes (R-Codes) and the City’s Residential Development Local
Planning Policy or any relevant structure plan.
5.3. Building height:
a. The maximum building height as measured from the natural ground level is to be in
accordance with the following table:
Maximum building height
Top of external wall Top of external wall Top of pitched roof
(concealed roof)
6 metres 7 metres 9 metres
5.4. Building design:
a. Development is to be in accordance with the following requirements:
Design element Development standard
(a) Appearance (i) Although the use is a non-residential land use, the
building must be of residential appearance, in keeping
with the surrounding environment, and not detract from
the amenity of adjoining properties.
(ii) The building and any additions must:
• be consistent in style with any existing development
on site; and/or
Consulting Rooms 2

• maintain and enhance the character of the local area;
and
• be compatible with the existing and/or desired
streetscape character.
This can be by the way of:
• scale
• material and colours
• roof design
• detailing
• window size.
5.5. Parking and access:
5.5.1. Car parking standard:
a. Car parking bays are to be provided in accordance with the following table:
Use class Number of on-site parking bays
Consulting rooms 5 bays per practitioner
5.5.2. Car parking location and design:
a. Car park access and design is to be in accordance with the following
requirements:
Design element Development requirement
(a) Car park location (i) All car parking is to be provided on-site; verge
parking is not permitted.
(ii) Car parks should, where practicable, be
located at the rear of the building and the
location clearly sign-posted. Car parking in
front of the consulting rooms should be
minimised in order to maintain a residential
streetscape.
(b) Car park design (i) Car parks shall be designed in accordance with
Australian Standards AS 2890.1 and/or AS
2890.2 as amended from time to time.
(ii) Tandem car parking will be considered for
employee parking only and must be clearly
designated as such.
(c) Vehicle access (i) Vehicles are required to enter and exit the site
in forward gear.
(ii) A maximum of two 3 metre wide crossovers or
one 6 metre wide crossover is permitted.
(d) Pedestrian access (i) A footpath must be provided from the carpark
and the street to the building entrance.
5.5.3. Bicycle parking standards:
a. Bicycle parking is to be provided in accordance with the following table and
relevant Australian standards.
Consulting Rooms 3

Use class Employee/visitor bicycle parking
Consulting rooms 2 spaces
5.6. Landscaping:
a. Landscaping is to be in accordance with the following requirements:
Design element Development requirement
(a) % Landscaping (i) A minimum of 8% of the area of a lot shall be
landscaped.
(ii) The landscaped area shall include a minimum strip of
1.5 metres wide adjacent to all street boundaries.
(b) Size (i) Any landscaped area shall have a minimum width of 1.0
metre and distributed in areas of not less than 4.0
square metres.
(c) Shade trees (i) Shade trees shall be provided and maintained in
uncovered car parks at the rate of one tree for every
four car parking bays.
(d) Verge (i) The verge areas of all consulting rooms are required to
be suitably landscaped, reticulated and maintained to
discourage patrons from parking on the verge. The
verge is not permitted to be paved or sealed as this
would encourage its use for parking.
5.7. Hours of operation:
a. The days and hours of operation are to be in accordance with the following:
Days Operating hours
Monday to Friday 8.00 am to 6.00 pm
Saturday 9.00 am to 5.00 pm
Sunday Not permitted
5.8. Public consultation:
a. Refer to the City’s Planning Consultation Local Planning Policy.
Creation date: June 2013 (CJ113-06/13)
Formerly: Consulting Rooms Policy
Amendments: CJ113-06/13, CJ057-04/17, CJ184-10/18, CJ033-03/20
Last reviewed: March 2020 (CJ033-03/20)
Related documentation: • City of Joondalup Local Planning Scheme No. 3
• Planning Consultation Local Planning Policy
File reference: 102788
Consulting Rooms 4