Local Planning
Policy 3.17
Hilton Neighbourhood
Centre (South Street,
Hilton)
fremantle.wa.gov.au

Hilton Neighbourhood Centre (South
Street, Hilton)
Statutory background
The Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (the
Regulations) provide the ability for local governments to prepare a local planning policy on
any matter relevant to the planning scheme area.
Clause 67 of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015,
Schedule 2, requires the Local Government to consider a broad range of matters when
determining an application.
Clause 4.2.2 of the City’s Local Planning Scheme No. 4 states that unless otherwise provided
for in the Scheme, the development of land for any of the residential purposes dealt with
by the Residential Design Codes is to conform to the provisions of the Residential Design
Codes.
Schedule 7 of Local Planning Scheme No. 4 provides additional development standards
including height and density for sub areas 7.3.1 (Area 1 and Area 2) the subject of this local
planning policy (refer to appendix 1 for a summary of these sub area requirements).
Introduction and purpose
The purpose of this policy is to provide controls that promote coordinated development that
enhance the character of the area, are sensitive to established development interfaces and
incorporate thoughtful design which provides high levels of public realm engagement. The
design objectives and criteria in this policy are intended to assist proponents in preparing
their development applications.
Application
This policy applies to nos. 180, 186, 188, 190, and192 Carrington Street, 15, 17, 19, 38,
40, 42, and 44 Victor Street, 273, 277, 279, 283, 285, 290, 292, 294, 296, 297, 299, 308,
and 312 South Street, 3 Lee Street and 1 and 3 Hughes Street.
In the event that there is a conflict between this policy, and a provision contained within a
Local Area Planning Policy, the most specific policy provision shall prevail.
1/12

Policy Area – Sub Area 7.3.1 of LPS4
Definitions
Active Edges means street frontages where there is an active engagement between
those in the street and those on the ground floors of buildings characteristically achieved
through building design and land use activation via retail and commercial opportunities.
Deep Planting Zone (DPZ) means an area of the lot for the exclusive use of supporting
plant life. The deep planting zone shall have a minimum length and width dimension of 4.5
metres and be water permeable, unpaved and uncovered. The deep planting zone shall
not be used for vehicle parking or access and contain no buildings, structures, or pergolas.
Building Envelope means the volume of space that can be occupied by a building,
defined by its setbacks and maximum height permitted. It is not an indication of the final
building form, mass, or scale, but merely the outer limits for construction.
All other definitions are as defined in the R-Codes and the City’s Local Planning Scheme
No. 4.
2/12

Policy statement
1. Development is to demonstrate it meets the following design objectives. The design
criteria provide specific points to consider when meeting the design objective.
Local Planning Policy design criteria
Site specific development controls (in addition to Schedule 7 provisions above)
Development context
Objectives:
Development should improve, acknowledge, and be responsive to surrounding
development, with appropriate consideration of adjacent site amenity where applicable.
Design criteria:
• Site design must be responsive to neighbouring sites, the existing context, and
neighbouring public realm, resulting in a positive contribution to the neighbourhood.
• Development must be sensitive to the interface with residential lots. Particular care
should be taken in the treatment of interfaces to residential properties outside the
centre where these are developed for single residential purposes to limit impact and
building bulk and overshadowing.
Site planning, orientation, and setbacks
Objectives:
Building design must demonstrate satisfactory site planning, orientation and setbacks
with specific attention to:
• public realm interface with adjoining streets to create interesting, activated and
amenable environments
• the interface with Residential zoned properties to minimise adverse impacts on
amenity
• the existing topography of the land and opportunities to ‘step’ development down
sloping sites.
Design criteria:
• Building orientation must consider the site, the street and neighbouring buildings to
maximise amenity, including architectural form to the street, solar access and visual
privacy.
• Where possible, orientation of buildings should also consider and provide
surveillance of internal roads proposed as part of the redevelopment.
• Where level changes occur on sites, ensure floor levels and entrances to buildings
appropriately interface with the ground plane.
• New development proposals should consider the interim opportunities for the South
Street road reserve setback to create an amenable interface and interim use of the
land through use of soft landscaping, pedestrian connections, awnings and
moveable or temporary furnishings (subject to the approval of Main Roads WA and /
or WAPC).
• The setback of buildings to, and their interface with, Carrington Street should
consider the provision of sufficient space and its treatment to accommodate
3/12

Local Planning Policy design criteria
Site specific development controls (in addition to Schedule 7 provisions above)
pedestrian demand and comfortable visitor entry. responses through the use of soft
landscaping, awnings and moveable or temporary furnishings.
Architectural expression and articulation
Objectives:
Development must convey a contemporary and high quality architectural response with
active edges at ground level and articulated facades above including appropriate building
form design to South Street frontages to achieve vibrant and stimulating pedestrian
experiences.
Building design must positively respond to the surrounding urban context, streets, and
neighbouring properties and be sensitive to the interface with properties in the
Residential zone.
New development should encourage innovative and imaginative development that
provides variety, articulation and building outcomes that will enhance the visual amenity
of the area.
Design criteria:
• The South Street ground level building facades of retail and commercial tenancies
shall be designed to address the street via entries and windows to create interest
and a sense of activity within the building.
• In buildings over 4 storeys, the design composition should include a legible but
harmonious base (boundary, setback, lower levels), middle (main façade) and top
(roof/parapet/upper level) in the façade.
• Continuous horizontal and vertical building elements shall be broken into smaller
components through architectural features, materials textures and/or building breaks
to maintain a built form rhythm and grain evocative of traditional town centre
character.
• Internalised habitable rooms, including bedrooms, will not be permitted.
• At least 60% of apartments shall be naturally cross ventilated.
Corners (buildings)
Objectives:
Address and activate key street corners and, where appropriate (principally the corners
of South Street and Carrington Street), create landmarks that assist in defining local
character.
Design criteria:
• Buildings on corners shall address both street frontages and include strong
architectural expression to both facades. The ground floor shall provide surveillance
and an active edge to the corner return.
• Blank walls to corner frontages will not be permitted.
4/12

Local Planning Policy design criteria
Site specific development controls (in addition to Schedule 7 provisions above)
Landscape design and public domain interface
Objectives:
Building design must ensure retail areas facilitate the creation of street level activity and
vitality of South Street and Carrington Street.
Developments must achieve a high quality public realm streetscape that is
complimentary to the wider neighbourhood.
New development designs should contribute to a comfortable pedestrian environments.
Landscaped interfaces between development and South Street shall give expression and
character to this location.
Design criteria:
• Consider the interim opportunities for land in the Metropolitan Regional Scheme
Primary Regional Road reserve setback to benefit the areas’ building and
streetscape responses. Where possible, a coordinated approach with adjoining
properties should be achieved.
• Pedestrian experience should be considered in the design of the public domain
interface through the use of elements such as footpaths, awnings, lighting, seating,
and landscaping which can contribute to improving weather protection, safety and
comfort.
• Development shall maximise opportunities to introduce deep planting zones for the
protection of trees. Retention of existing trees is encouraged.
Vehicle parking and access
Objectives:
On-site vehicle parking and access is appropriately located to minimise adverse visual
impact on the streetscape.
Design criteria:
• Where possible, vehicle access shall be taken from the rear of the site.
• Where car parking is provided underground or in a building, car park access shall be
integrated with the building’s overall facade.
• Car parking and access must also address other design and layout criteria specified
in the scheme and other council policies.
Building services
Objectives:
Services are to be well integrated and have minimal visual and acoustic impact on the
public realm and adjacent buildings.
Design criteria:
• Waste management and storage designs shall minimise the impact on adjoining
residences and be screened from view.
• Bin stores and heavy vehicle manoeuvring areas should be located away from the
boundaries of residential zoned properties and / or the interface treated to mitigate
noise impacts. Provision of an acoustic assessment demonstrating capacity to
5/12

comply with the Environmental Protection (Noise) Regulations 1997 may be required
as a pre-requisite to approval.
• Building mechanical services including plant and service equipment shall be
integrated into the roof design and / or not be visible above the roof line of the
building facade from the public realm.
6/12

Appendix 1 – Summary of LPS4 Schedule 7 Provisions –
Sub Area 7.3.1
Sub Area Map – Sub Area 7.3.1
Summary of Schedule 7 provisions
(contained within Local Planning Scheme No. 4)
Within sub area 7.3.1, clause 4.2.5 does not apply; the following additional development
standards do apply.
Sub Area 7.3.1 – General provisions
a) All new non-residential buildings shall be a minimum of 7 metres in height.
b) All new non-residential buildings in Area 1 shall incorporate an activated frontage
to the primary street.
c) The base density code of R20 applies only where development proposals do not
achieve all of the design criteria for Sub Area 7.3.1 to gain higher density
provisions.
7/12

Summary of Schedule 7 provisions
(contained within Local Planning Scheme No. 4)
Within sub area 7.3.1, clause 4.2.5 does not apply; the following additional development
standards do apply.
Sub Area 7.3.1 – Area 1 provisions
Achievable Residential Density Code
R160
Land use
South Street and Carrington Residential land uses are not permitted at ground floor
Street frontage level
Building height (minimum)
South Street frontage 7.0m*1
Building height (maximum)
All lots 17.0m
South Street frontage New ground floors shall not be more than 600mm above
the adjacent footpath
Floor to floor heights on the ground floor shall be a
minimum of 4.0m above the adjacent footpath
Building height buffer
Development proposed
14.0m
within 5m of the boundary
of any lot outside sub area
7.3.1
Building setbacks
10.0m minimum*2
South Street Frontage 12.0m maximum
Maximum building separation distance of 6.0m (aggregated)*3
nil minimum
Frontage to roads other
than South Street
2.0m maximum
Building frontages
Building facade to incorporate windows and doors at the
South Street frontage
ground floor and windows to the first level
Car parking and vehicle access
Development sites with frontage to South Street and an
South Street frontage
alternative public road shall only have vehicle access via the
8/12

Summary of Schedule 7 provisions
(contained within Local Planning Scheme No. 4)
Within sub area 7.3.1, clause 4.2.5 does not apply; the following additional development
standards do apply.
alternative public road. Access shall be designed to coordinate
with adjoining properties.
Traffic Impact Assessment shall be submitted to support any
planning application for lots with frontage to South Street*4.
Vehicle parking shall be located at the rear of buildings, below
ground level and / or on roof top level
Outdoor living area
Minimum outdoor living
15m2
area
Landscaping
At least 10% of the site area shall be landscaped with planting and permeable surfaces.
Summary of Schedule 7 provisions
(contained within Local Planning Scheme No. 4)
Within sub area 7.3.1, clause 4.2.5 does not apply; The following additional
development standards do apply.
Sub Area 7.3.1 – Area 1 bonus density provisions
Achievable Residential Density Code
R-AC1*5
Achievable building height (maximum)
All lots 20.0m
Building height buffer
Development proposed
14.0m
within 5m of the boundary
of any lot outside sub area
7.3.1
Lot size requirements
Minimum lot size of 2400m2
9/12

Summary of Schedule 7 provisions
(contained within Local Planning Scheme No. 4)
Within sub area 7.3.1, clause 4.2.5 does not apply; The following additional
development standards do apply.
Building design
Incorporates a distinctive architectural feature and achieves exceptional design
achieving the principles listed under Part 6.11, Schedule A, clause 78B of the Scheme.
Additional development requirements
Development must Incorporates a minimum of two levels of non-residential land
satisfy at least one of uses, one of which shall be the ground floor level.
the following criteria:
At ground floor level, a minimum of 1000m2 net lettable area
designed for occupation by a single tenancy for ‘shop’ land use
as defined in Schedule 1 – Land Use Definitions of this
Scheme.
A minimum of 10% of the residential net lettable area of the
development shall be provided in the form of dwellings which
meet the definition of ‘affordable housing’ in Schedule 1 –
Land Use Definitions of this Scheme.
Summary of Schedule 7 provisions
(contained within Local Planning Scheme No. 4)
Within sub area 7.3.1, clause 4.2.5 does not apply; The following additional
development standards do apply.
Sub Area 7.3.1 – Area 1 bonus density provisions
Achievable Residential Density Code
R100 (only when minimum lot size is achieved).
Achievable building height (maximum)
Lots equal or greater than 14.0m
1000m2
Building height buffer
Development proposed
11.0m
within 5m of the boundary
of any lot outside sub area
7.3.1
Lot size requirements
Lot size of 1000m2 or greater
10/12

Summary of Schedule 7 provisions
(contained within Local Planning Scheme No. 4)
Within sub area 7.3.1, clause 4.2.5 does not apply; The following additional
development standards do apply.
Car parking and vehicle access
Carrington Street Sites with frontage to Carrington Street and an alternative
frontage public road shall only have vehicle access via the alternative
public road.
Access shall be designed to encourage coordination of access
to adjoining properties.
Notes:
1 A minimum building height of 7 metres, including a building facade on the South Street
frontage which incorporates windows and doors at the ground floor and windows to the
first-floor level to create interest and a sense of activity within the building, applies.
2 Unless Main Roads has no objection to a reduced street setback.
3 Applies to ground floor level of development to South Street only. The 6.0m maximum
aggregate width applies to spaces between the building and/or to the building side lot
setbacks.
4 The Traffic Impact Assessment (required as specified in Schedule 7) is to be undertaken
by a suitably qualified traffic engineer and shall be submitted in support of application
for planning approval.
5 Design criteria required to be met in order for bonus density to apply – applicable to
new buildings.
11/12

Responsibility and review information
Responsible officer: Manager Strategic Planning and City Design
Document 27 June 2012 – Item SPT1806-4
adoption/approval
details
Document 9 October 2024 – Item C2410-4
amendment details
25 October 2024 (Administrative) – Inserted policy into the
City’s current template, including updated ‘Statutory
Background’ paragraph, moved ‘Policy Area – Sub Area 7.3.1 of
LPS4’ map under the ‘Application’ section, corrected various
typographical errors, re-ordered and renumbered notes for
clarity, and updated references as follows:
• ‘Schedule 8 of LPS4’ to ‘Schedule 7 of LPS4’
• ‘Schedule 12 of LPS4’ to ‘Schedule 7 of LPS4’; and
• ‘clause 11.8.6.3 of LPS4’ to ‘Part 6.11, Schedule A, clause
78B of LPS4’.
Next review date 9 October 2028
12/12