33/2017
Planning Bulletin 33/2017
Rights-of-way or laneways in
established areas
January 2017
1. Purpose restricting access by installation of “Private right-of-way” means the
bollards, to complete closure and balance of title from a subdivision
This Planning Bulletin establishes
division between adjacent owners. held in private ownership over which
the Western Australian Planning
This Planning Bulletin encourages the adjacent owners have an implied right
Commission’s (WAPC) policy, practice
adoption of a coordinated long-term of access under Section 167A of the
and procedures regarding residential
approach to the use and upgrading Transfer of Land Act 1893.
and commercial development and
of rights-of-way in areas undergoing
subdivision (including strata and “Public right-of-way” means land
redevelopment and outlines some
survey-strata) adjoining existing vested in the Crown under the
of the key issues and approaches to
rights-of-way (or laneways). Transfer of Land Act 1893 for public
be generally applied. It is recognised
use. These can be ceded to the
that management approaches should
The development of rights-of-way in
Crown on subdivision under Section
reflect local circumstances.
“greenfield” subdivisions in new urban
152 of the Planning and Development
areas, or on large urban infill sites
Act 2005.
within developed areas, is addressed
3. Definitions
in the WAPC’s Development “Public road” means a public
Control Policy 1.7 - General Road “Dedication” means the acquisition thoroughfare for vehicles (as defined
Planning (DC 1.7) and Liveable as Crown land of any alienated land or in the Road Traffic (Administration) Act
Neighbourhoods. private road which has been used by 2008 section 4) or pedestrians, and
the public, following a request from a includes structures or other things
local government to the Minister for appurtenant to the road that are within
2. Background
Lands under Section 56 of the Land its limits, and a thoroughfare is not
Administration Act 1997. prevented from being a road only
Private rights-of-way are separate
because it is not open at each end.
parcels of land which were generally
“Laneway” means a narrow local
created in subdivisions around the
street type without a verge located
turn of the century to facilitate sanitary
along the rear and/or side property 4. Who has the right to use
collections from the rear of properties
boundary, typically used in more private rights-of-way?
prior to the installation of reticulated
dense residential areas when smaller
sewerage. They usually remained lot layouts justify rear garaging, and Section 167A of the Transfer of Land
in the ownership of the original where alternative vehicle access is Act 1893 indicates that the registered
subdivider after the lots shown on needed for lots fronting busy streets proprietors of the original lots, which
the Plan or Diagram of Survey were or parks. were included in the Plan or Diagram
sold off. Private rights-of- way are of Survey creating that private
nowadays often the ‘balance of title’ “Private road” means alley, court, right-of-way, have an ‘implied right’
contained in a Certificate of Title still lane, road, street, thoroughfare or yard easement to use them provided it
registered in the name of the original on alienated land which is shown on a is shown as a ‘right-of-way’ on the
subdivider, perhaps a deceased Plan or Diagram of Survey deposited Land Titles Office Plan or Diagram of
person or a defunct company. with the Registrar of Titles and which: Survey.
However, these private rights-of-way
(a) is not dedicated, whether The present owners of abutting lots
are often used by the public for a
under a written law or at (providing the lots, or lots from which
range of purposes and in established
common law, for use by the they were created, were included
areas are increasingly relied upon for
public; on the Plan or Diagram of Survey in
access. Sometimes these rights-of-
which the right-of-way was created)
way have been acquired by the local (b) forms a common access to the
have the right to upgrade, seal and
government and, in many cases, land, or premises, separately
drain and to use, along with guests
dedicated as public roads. occupied; or
and invitees, the right-of-way for
There are a range of approaches (c) is accessible from an alley, vehicular and pedestrian access.
which have been adopted for the court, lane, road, street,
Sometimes lots which abut a right-
management of private rights-of- thoroughfare, yard or public
of-way do not have a section 167A
way. These range from upgrading place that is dedicated,
easement because they were not
their status to a minor public street whether under a written law or
created on the same Plan or Diagram
with public utilities, lighting, postal at common law, to use as such
of Survey as the right-of-way.
services, landscaping and parking by the public (Section 3 of the
Landowners in these cases may,
bays, to paving and draining, to Land Administration Act 1997).
nonetheless, still have rights to use
1

a right-of-way at Common Law or a requirement to provide block in which widening,
under the Prescription Act 1832, but a pedestrian access leg to parking, lighting and other
investigation of this would need to be the public street for postal, services are provided for
undertaken. visitor, rubbish collection may be desirable. Such
and public utilities (e.g. a plan was successfully
water, gas, electricity and implemented on Easton
5. What should be done
telephone). This can be in the Lane, off Sackville Terrace,
to rights-of-way in
form of a portion of the rear Doubleview.
established areas? lot or as common property
It is desirable for the local
in the case of a strata title
5.1 Redevelopment adjacent to or survey strata subdivision. government to seek the
rights-of-way While one metre access legs dedication of the right-of-
way as a public road or to
may be accepted where
Access via rights-of-way acquire ownership of the
a site is constrained by
facilitates the development right-of-way.
existing buildings worthy
of infill dwellings at the rear
of retention being set back
of existing residences which
utilise rights-of-way as less than 1.5 metres from 6. What are the appropriate
the boundary, generally a
their sole vehicular access design standards for
1.5 metre width is favoured
to the dedicated street rights-of-way?
as providing sufficient space
network or for rear access
to new narrow lots. This for services and to avoid Some of the design solutions
may facilitate the greater visually unattractive narrow associated with 5 or 6 metre wide
use of urban land without alleyways. rights-of-way in established areas are
detrimentally affecting the illustrated on the attached diagrams.
5.2 Upgrading of rights-of-way
streetscape particularly in
6.1 Width of rights-of-way
heritage areas. The use of The upgrading of rights-of-
rights-of-way is considered way to a sealed and drained Rights-of-way were not
to provide a superior living standard should be required designed to carry frequent
environment to battleaxe in areas of intensification of vehicular traffic. The narrow
development. In particular residential and commercial width of some rights-of-
it is considered preferable development. It is way coupled with increased
for houses to face streets suggested that proponents vehicular traffic could
and laneways rather than of development with sole lead to property damage
be enclosed in backyards. It vehicular access via the and accidents due to the
also contributes to personal right-of-way should be insufficient space for the
safety through surveillance. required to seal and drain manoeuvring of vehicles
the portion of right-of-way around bends and into and
However, redevelopment
abutting the subject property out of properties. The narrow
adjacent to unmade private
(if not already constructed width of many rights-of-
rights-of-way may increase
to that standard) and make way can leave insufficient
vehicular usage and create
trafficable (to the satisfaction space for passing either
management problems for
of the local government) the oncoming or parked vehicles
which there is no identifiable
rest of the right-of-way to the and ispotentially unsafe
responsible authority.
closest public street. In other for pedestrians. Before
Where sole vehicular cases contributions towards comprehensive development
access via a right-of- right-of-way upgrading may occurs adjacent to rights-of-
way is proposed for be required as a condition of way there may be a need for
residential subdivision subdivision or development widening.
and/or development and approval. Such contributions
the right-of-way is not a may follow the principles Liveable Neighbourhoods
public road, applicants and considerations set in requires a minimum width of
should be required to the WAPC’s State Planning 6 metres for a right-of-way
demonstrate (by submission Policy 3.6 Development for vehicular access. This is
of copies of the Certificate contributions for provision of based upon the minimum
of Title and original Plan or infrastructure. space required to manoeuvre
a car into or out of a garage,
Diagram of Survey or other
In order to provide for the carport or parking space at
documentation) that they
upgrading of a right-of- right angles to the right-of-
have a right to use the right-
way to facilitate adjacent way.
of-way.
development, a more
Where sole vehicular access coordinated approach may It is recognised that vehicles
is via a right-of-way and one be required. The preparation can pass safely (at low
of the lots does not have a of plan for a whole street speed) in a 5 metre wide right
of-way. Therefore, existing
frontage to the public street
5 metre wide rights-of-way
then there will generally be
may not require widening if
2

they only provide (vehicular) Where particular constraints street network, and wider
access to garages, and are preclude the widening of a sections of right-of-way to
not the main (pedestrian right-of-way for residential allow for the installation of
access to dwellings or developments, the following visitor parking.
commercial premises alternative design solutions
adjoining the rights-of- may be acceptable:- 6.3 Traffic flow and design
way. For example, where speed
• one-way traffic operation
a pedestrian access leg to
on a right-of-way less Liveable Neighbourhoods
the public street is provided
than 5 metres wide; recommends an indicative
(as in paragraph 4.1 above)
maximum traffic volume of
pedestrians, emergency, • on-site parking bays 300 vehicles per day (vpd)
postal and other services constructed immediately and target maximum speed
and rubbish collectors have adjacent and parallel of 15 km/h.
alternative access to the to the right-of-way (not
rear development and to within the right-of-way); 6.4 Truncations
on-street parking, and so
the requirement to widen the • narrow one-lane sections DC 1.7 recommends that
right-of-way may be waived of right-of-way with wider a 2.8 metre truncation (2
where all development in the sections for vehicles m x 2 m) may be required
street block is likely to follow to pass at appropriate where two private streets
this pattern. locations, and other (i.e. rights-of-way) meet or
similar approaches. where a private street meets
The WAPC will not normally
a public street.
support dedication where the Any such proposal needs
width is less than 5 metres, to be carefully considered Liveable Neighbourhoods
and where the right-of way in relation to the operation is silent on the need for
is the sole frontage for the of the surrounding street truncations for rights-of-way
proposed lots. network and must be but provides guidance for
endorsed by the relevant truncations in laneways. An
It should be noted that with local government before a acceptable alternative to
a 5 metre right-of-way the subdivision or development truncations could be to
garages (at right angles to application is approved. reduce the width of the
the right-of-way) should be
pavement at the neck of the
set back at least one metre 6.2 Length of rights-of-way laneway.
from the property boundary
to achieve the required The WAPC will generally To improve sight lines
manoeuvring space for a not support dedication and turning radii, it is
vehicle to reverse into or where rights-of-way are of recommended that
out of the garage. Where excessive length (in excess appropriate truncations be
garages are set back behind of 140 metres) and where required where two rights-
the property boundary it there is no alternative of- way meet (or at any
is recommended that a pedestrian access to the bend in a right-of-way of
45 degree visibility splay street. Having such long or 60 degrees or more). A 2.8
either side of the garage narrow streets as the sole metre truncation (2 m x 2 m)
entrance should also be access (both for vehicles and would improve sight lines
kept clear of development pedestrians) to properties and turning radii for cars
to improve visibility and is considered undesirable and, in 6 metre rights-of-
make turning manoeuvres and may result in excessive way, may be adequate for
easier. Alternatives to the one walking distances to visitor most rubbish trucks (this
metre garage set back could parking in the surrounding should be confirmed with the
include wider garages (which streets and result in visitors relevant local government).
allow the turning manoeuvre parking in the right-of-way. For larger vehicles, such
to commence within the as furniture removal vans
Where a length of right-of-
garage)or garages aligned at and fire engines, larger
way longer than 140 metres
less than 90 degrees to the truncations may be required
is dictated by the existing
right-of-way (which reduces upon the recommendation of
street network then it may
the width of the turning local government. If rubbish
require special treatment to
path). It is recognised that trucks are required to access
restrict traffic volumes and
some local governments the right-of-way they should
speeds.
already have more restrictive not have to reverse into or
requirements in this regard. Some possible treatments out of the right-of-way. As
for long rights-of-way other larger vehicles will be
could include the use of much less frequent it may
traffic calming devices to be acceptable for them to
slow traffic, intermediate reverse in or out of the right-
connections to the local of-way.
3

Where the right-of-way component of the right-of- Where the private right-
connects to a public street way design. This could be of-way is dedicated and
the need for a truncation is provided, for example, by provides the only way
related to sight lines between attaching lighting to adjoining of accessing individual
vehicles in the right-of-way buildings with the owners’ dwellings or commercial
and pedestrians or cyclists consent to a long-term lease premises, it becomes a
on paths in the street verge. at peppercorn rental, with the street in function and would
Where a path is located close local government funding the need to provide the normal
to the property boundary a installation, maintenance and services of a street such as
truncation should be applied tariff. public utilities, access for
or the pavement reduced emergency vehicles, postal
Where there is not a
in width at the neck of the services, refuse collection,
reasonable expectation that
laneway, but if there is no street name and numbering.
pedestrians will use the
path, or if the path is located Dedication means that the
right-of-way (e.g. where the
away from the property general public and various
right-of-way only provides
boundary, the truncation public utility authorities have
vehicular access to garages)
could be reduced in size or the right to use the right-
the requirement for provision
not required. of- way, in addition to the
of lighting would be at
adjoining residents.
6.5 Parking provision the discretion of the local
government but should Section 52 of the Land
The parking needs of usually be encouraged for Administration Act 1997
residents should be improved security. provides for a local
accommodated on-site government to request the
or, in some cases, by 6.7 Surveillance of rights-of- Minister for Lands to close a
an appropriate cash- way right-of-way by acquiring the
in-lieu arrangement for land as Crown land where
Building design which allows
the local government to the land is designated for
for the overlooking of rights-
provide public parking a public purpose on a plan
of-way from facing buildings
facilities. In determining of survey or sketch plan.
should be encouraged.
parking requirements for The procedure requires the
Potential for surveillance
developments no allowance local government to notify
from windows provides
or credit should be given for the holder of the freehold
greater security for the users
parking within the right-of- land, the adjacent owners
of the rights-of-way and
way. and suppliers of public
adjacent properties.
utilities to the land. The local
Wherever possible, visitor
government is also required
parking (in excess of
7. How should to advertise its intention in a
the local government
improvements to rights- daily newspaper circulating
requirements for on-site
throughout the State and
parking provision) should of-way be implemented?
to provide at least 30 days
occur on the surrounding
within which objections may
streets with access to 7.1 Dedication of rights-of-way
be lodged.
residences along the right-of-
Dedication of private rights-
way or through the property Under Section 56 of the
of- way (or acquisition of
(e.g. where a pedestrian Land Administration Act
the private street by the
access leg is provided, 1997 the local government
local government) is often
or common property in a may request the Minister
considered desirable to
strata titled or survey-strata for Lands to dedicate the
enable management and
development). Where this land as a road. Under this
maintenance by the local
is not possible then visitor section the owner of the
government, particularly
parking should be provided freehold land on which a
where redevelopment is
on site. right-of-way had been used
taking place adjacent to the
by the public for over ten
6.6 Lighting private right-of-way. Even years is not entitled to claim
where upgrading is not
compensation.
Where there is a reasonable envisaged, it is considered
expectation that pedestrians appropriate that rights-
7.2 Securing land for widening
will use the right-of-way of-way be considered as
of rights-of-way
(especially in the case public areas for which local
where residences do not government should be Sections 168 or 152 of the
have alternative pedestrian the responsible authority. Planning and Development
access to the public street) Dedication of rights-of- Act 2005 can be used to
lighting should be provided way also resolves the legal require private right-of-way
at appropriate intervals (to question of who has a right or narrow dedicated laneway
the satisfaction of the local to use the right- of-way. widening. Section 168 can
government) as an essential
4

be used to dedicate the Where a subdivision or
widening as a public street development is adjacent
where the widening connects to a right-of-way less
to the existing dedicated than 6 metres wide (or
street network, or Section 5 metres, if appropriate)
152 can be used to create but does not, or is not
a reserve for public right- required to, make use of
of-way in the event that the the right-of-way for access,
widening will not connect to it may not be considered
the existing dedicated public equitable to require land for
street system. Section 168 widening the right-of-way
may also be used to create to be given up free of cost.
an addition or truncation to a However, development on
public street by showing it on such properties should be
a strata or survey-strata plan. encouraged to be set back
This would administratively by an extra amount equal to
simplify the widening of any widening required so that
public rights-of-way where the local government has
strata titles development the option to purchase land
is occurring as once the to widen the right-of-way in
widening is shown on the the future if this is allowed for
strata plan it automatically as part of a comprehensive
vests without requiring formal development plan for the
subdivisional approval. right-of-way.
Wherever a subdivision 7.3 Local government policies
(including strata title
or survey strata) or It is considered appropriate
development gains access for individual local
from a right-of-way less governments to refine
than 6 metres wide (or 5 these guidelines to
metres, if appropriate), the take into consideration
approval may require that local circumstances.
the land required to widen Local governments are
the laneway to 6 metres requested to notify the
(assuming equal widening Department of Planning
on both sides of the right-of- of any adopted rights-
way, where appropriate) will of-way policy to ensure
be given up free of cost to that in the Department’s
be dedicated to public use. advice to the WAPC on
While this could leave the individual subdivision and
right-of-way at less than the strata applications local
desired width for much of its requirements are taken into
length until redevelopment account.
occurred on the other
Developers are encouraged
adjacent properties, a long-
to contact the relevant
term view needs to be taken.
local government before
This reflects the increasing
lodging applications to
need for greater width
determine whether the local
(improved vehicle passing
government has additional
opportunities, etc.) as the
requirements to those set out
number of developments
above.
accessing the right-of-way
grows.
For development
applications the requirement
to give up land for widening
the right-of-way will
necessitate a subdivision or
strata application, although
such an application is usually
sought by developers to
provide separate titles for
new units.
5

Typical cross section of a 6m laneway
6

Typical 6m laneway in an established residential area
7

Typical 5m laneway in an established residential area
8

Disclaimer © Western Australia Planning Commission website: www.planning.wa.gov.au
email: corporate@planning.wa.gov.au
This document has been published by the Western Australian Published by the
Planning Commission. Any representation, statement, Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 9000
opinion or advice expressed or implied in this publication is Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
made in good faith and on the basis that the government, its 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
employees and agents are not liable for any damage or loss Perth WA 6000 infoline: 1800 626 477
whatsoever which may occur as a result of action taken or not Locked Bag 2506 This document is available
taken, as the case may be, in respect of any representation, Perth WA 6001 in alternative formats on
statement, opinion or advice referred to herein. Professional application to Department of
Published January 2017
advice should be obtained before applying the information Planning Communication Services
contained in this document to particular circumstances. ISSN 1324-9142
9