State Planning Policy 3.7
Bushfire
November 2024
Prepared under Section 26 of the Planning and Development Act 2005

The Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage
acknowledges the traditional owners and custodians
of land and waterways across Western Australia.
The Department is committed to reconciliation to
improve outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait click to follow
Islander peoples and to work together to provide a
culturally-safe and inclusive environment. 1 CITATION 1
2 POLICY INTENT 1
Disclaimer
This document has been produced by the
3 BUSHFIRE IN
Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage on behalf
WESTERN AUSTRALIA 1
of the Western Australian Planning Commission.
Any representation, statement, opinion or advice
expressed or implied in this publication is made in
4 APPLICATION OF THIS
good faith and on the basis that the Government, its
POLICY 1
employees and agents are not liable for any damage or
loss whatsoever which may occur as a result of action
taken or not taken, as the case may be, in respect of any
5 POLICY OBJECTIVES 3
representation, statement, opinion or advice referred to
herein. Professional advice should be obtained before
applying the information contained in this document to
6 POLICY OUTCOMES 3
particular circumstances.
7 POLICY MEASURES 3
© State of Western Australia
7.1 General measures 3
Published by the
7.2 Broader landscape 4
Western Australian Planning Commission
Gordon Stephenson House 7.3 Siting in BAL-40 or
140 William Street BAL-Flame Zone 4
Perth WA 6000
7.4 Vulnerable land uses 4
Locked Bag 2506 7.5 Outcomes-based
Perth WA 6001
approach 4
Publication date: 18/11/2024
Operational date: 18/11/2024
DEFINITIONS 5
This policy, on 18/11/2024, in accordance with Part 3,
Section 20(1)(a) of the Planning and Development
(State Planning Policies) Regulations 2024, repeals
SPP 3.7 Planning in Bushfire Prone Areas (2015)
website: wa.gov.au/dplh
email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
tel: 08 6551 8002
fax: 08 6551 9001
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
This document is available in alternative formats on
application to the Department of Planning, Lands and
Heritage Communications Branch.

State Planning Policy 3.7
1
Bushfire
November 2024
1 CITATION injury or property damage. Bushfire threat can never be • the Deemed Provisions contained in the Planning and
completely eliminated, and landowners should recognise Development (Local Planning Schemes) Amendment
This is a State Planning Policy prepared under Part 3 of the need for management and evacuation measures Regulations 2015 that form part of every local
the Planning and Development Act 2005. It may be cited as when accepting a level of personal risk and responsibility planning scheme;
State Planning Policy 3.7 Bushfire (SPP 3.7). through choosing to live in bushfire prone areas.
• where relevant, any supplementary provisions of a
Reducing vulnerability to bushfire is the collective local planning scheme; and
responsibility of State and local governments, landowners, • Australian Standard 3959: Construction of Buildings in
2 POLICY INTENT industry and the community. It requires ongoing Bushfire-Prone Areas.
commitment and diligence to locate and design
To implement effective, risk-based land use planning development appropriately, manage potential fuel
and development which in the first instance avoids the loads, implement bushfire management plans, provide
bushfire risk, but where unavoidable, manages and/or emergency services, increase awareness of the potential A designated bushfire prone area is an area that
mitigates the risk to people, property and infrastructure risk through education, and ensure bushfire emergency has been identified and designated by the Fire
to an acceptable level. The preservation of life and the plans are in place, among other management measures. and Emergency Services Commissioner (FES
management of bushfire impact are paramount. Such measures, working in conjunction with planning Commissioner) under the Fire and Emergency
policy and building controls, have the effect of increasing Services Act 1998 (as amended). Such areas
community resilience to bushfire. are identified on the Map of Bush Fire Prone
Areas as either Area 1 (Urban) or Area 2. Area 1
3 BUSHFIRE IN WESTERN (Urban) comprises built-up urban areas where the
AUSTRALIA risk posed by bushfire to people, property and
4 APPLICATION OF THIS POLICY
infrastructure is lower. Area 2 covers the rest of
Bushfires are an inherent part of the Australian the designated areas of Western Australia.
This policy in conjunction with the Planning for Bushfire
environment. In many parts of Western Australia, bushfire
Guidelines (Guidelines) provide the foundation for land
threat is increasing due to hotter, drier weather conditions
use planning to address bushfire management in Western
associated with long-term climatic changes and
Australia. It is to be used to inform and guide decision-
development expansion where urban, rural and natural Where the planning proposal or development is within an
makers, referral agencies and landowners/proponents to
areas interface. The personal and community devastation area designated as bushfire prone on the Map of Bush Fire
help achieve acceptable bushfire protection outcomes.
that can be caused by uncontrolled bushfires requires Prone Areas, and:
consistent application of policy objectives that avoid, The policy is to be read in conjunction with: • results in the intensification of development (or land
manage or mitigate such effects. • the Map of Bush Fire Prone Areas; use); or
Under certain weather conditions, bushfire incidents can • the supporting Planning for Bushfire Guidelines • results in an increase of visitors, residents or
reach catastrophic magnitudes. Fire conditions may be (Guidelines); employees; or
such that even development consistent with planning • adversely impacts or increases the bushfire risk to the
policy and building controls may not be enough to
subject or surrounding site(s),
ensure the bushfire threat is sufficiently reduced to avoid

State Planning Policy 3.7
2
Bushfire
November 2024
then the following trigger the application of the policy: Figure: Application of
Area 1
• a strategic planning proposal within Area 2 on the policy Strategic planning (urban) Do not require a bushfire assessment
Map of Bush Fire Prone Areas, that has or will have a
Bushfire Hazard Level (BHL) above LOW
Undertake a bushfire assessment,
* Note there is no requirement for strategic planning Strategic planning Area 2 with a focus on demonstrating compliance
proposals within Area 1 (Urban) to apply the policy with Element 1: location
• a structure plan where lot layout and/or the internal
road network is known, or a subdivision, that has or Structure plan Subdivision, that has or will have
and subdivision a Bushfire Attack Level (BAL) rating
will have a Bushfire Attack Level (BAL) rating above
above BAL-LOW
BAL-LOW
• a development application where the development
Change of use to
site(s) has a BAL rating above BAL-LOW, where the hosted or unhosted SPP does not apply
application is for the: accommodation
– construction of a habitable building (single house
Single house or
or ancillary dwelling) on a lot more than 1, 100 m2,
ancillary dwelling SPP does not apply
which is not connected to reticulated water; and/ under 1,100m2
or
– construction and/or use of a habitable building Development application
required for BAL – 40 and above
(other than a single house or ancillary dwelling),
Single house or (construction only)
for a vulnerable land use
ancillary dwelling
over 1,100m2
– construction and/or use of a caravan park, If no reticulated water, development
application required for above BAL LOW
nature-based park or camping ground (whether it
(construction only)
contains a habitable building(s) or not)
• a development application where the development
Development application
site(s) has a radiant heat impact exceeding 29kW/m2 required for BAL – 40 and above
(BAL-40 or BAL-Flame Zone), where the application is Commercial and (construction only)
industrial habitable
for the: buildings and
specified buildings If no reticulated water, development
– construction of a habitable building (single house application required for above BAL LOW
(construction only)
or ancillary dwelling) on a lot more than 1, 100 m2,
Vulnerable habitable
which is connected to reticulated water; and/or
buildings and vulnerable
land uses Development application
– construction of a habitable building (other than a for above BAL – LOW
&
single house or ancillary dwelling). (construction or use, or construction and use)
Caravan and camping
grounds (with or without
habitable buildings)

State Planning Policy 3.7
3
Bushfire
November 2024
5 POLICY OBJECTIVES 6 POLICY OUTCOMES 7 POLICY MEASURES
The objectives of this policy are to: The outcomes listed below specify the role of planning 7.1 General measures
and development in contributing to the overall objectives
5.1 Avoid the bushfire risk in the first instance, but i. Bushfire should be considered at the earliest
of this policy. Each outcome is reflected within the
where unavoidable, manage and/or mitigate possible stage of the planning process and
elements of the Guidelines – Location, Siting and design,
the risk to people, property and infrastructure, to all subsequent stages in accordance with the
Vehicular access and Water supply. The outcomes
ensure the risks are acceptable and appropriate to Guidelines.
are achieved through compliance with the bushfire
the land use and the location.
protection criteria, utilising the acceptable solutions ii. Strategic planning, subdivisions and development
5.2 Improve the bushfire resilience of communities or through an outcomes-based approach. applications to which this policy applies are to be
through the provision of appropriate community The outcomes may also provide a basis for evaluation accompanied by a bushfire management plan,
infrastructure, for use by emergency services and of the implementation of this policy. prepared in accordance with the Guidelines and
the community in the event of a bushfire. include the following information:
Strategic planning, subdivision and development should:
5.3 Ensure development is resilient to increasingly a. an assessment of the broader landscape
severe and more frequent bushfires compounded 6.1 Avoid broader landscapes that present an (where required);
by climate change. unacceptable bushfire risk to people, property and
b. the identification of any environmental,
infrastructure.
5.4 Prioritise the retention of native vegetation biodiversity or conservation values on the
for biodiversity conservation, environmental 6.2 Ensure siting and design solutions: subject site, including vegetation that may
protection and landscape amenity. • manage or mitigate the bushfire risk to be impacted by any proposed clearing or
people, property and infrastructure; and modification, necessary to mitigate bushfire
risk;
• avoid, or where unavoidable, minimises
clearing of native vegetation. c. a Bushfire Hazard Level, Bushfire Attack Level
(BAL), Contour Map or BAL assessment;
6.3 Ensure the design and capacity of vehicular access
and egress provide: d. the identification of any bushfire hazard issues
arising from the assessment; and
• for efficient and effective evacuation to a
suitable destination(s); and/or e. assessment against the bushfire protection
criteria contained within the Guidelines,
• as a contingency measure for vulnerable
demonstrating compliance via either the
tourism land uses, an on-site shelter, where
acceptable solutions, or through an outcomes-
demonstrated appropriate, as a last resort
based approach.
option.
iii. Proposals should be accompanied by sufficient
6.4 Ensure that sufficient water is available and
information relevant to the applicable stage of
accessible for emergency services, to enable
the planning process and in accordance with the
people, property and infrastructure to be
Guidelines.
defended from bushfire.

State Planning Policy 3.7
4
Bushfire
November 2024
iv. Proposals and supporting information should be 7.4 Vulnerable land uses c) detail how the design addresses bushfire
referred to relevant agencies in accordance with risk and where additional bushfire risk
i. Strategic proposals, subdivision and development
the Guidelines. management measures have been deemed
applications for vulnerable land uses should
necessary and included to minimise the risk;
comply with policy measure 7.1.
7.2 Broader landscape
d) detail if there are any community net-benefits,
ii. Development applications for vulnerable land
i. Proposals located within a Broader Landscape such as improvements to the public road
uses, should include a bushfire emergency plan
Type B in accordance with the methodology network;
prepared in accordance with the Guidelines
within the Guidelines, will not be supported
e) include any fire engineering solutions or
unless the proposal has demonstrated through iii. A bushfire emergency plan may not be
written evidence such as publications and
an outcomes-based approach that the required for strategic proposals and subdivision
State Administrative Tribunal decisions to
broader landscape risk to people, property and applications to facilitate vulnerable land uses,
support the proposal (where available);
infrastructure is acceptable.. as at this level there is generally not sufficient
f) outline how the policy outcomes have been
information or detail available. Consideration of
7.3 Siting in BAL-40 or BAL-Flame Zone achieved; and
bushfire emergency procedures and options for
evacuation, off-site shelter and where relevant, g) outline why approval is warranted by the
i. There is a presumption against approving
on-site shelter, should be included within the decision-maker in this instance.
development site(s) or habitable building(s) in
bushfire management plan.
areas with a radiant heat impact exceeding iii. Where an outcomes-based approach is unable to
29kW/m2 (BAL-40 or BAL-FZ). demonstrate that the outcomes of this policy can
7.5 Outcomes-based approach
be achieved, to the satisfaction of the decision-
ii. However, the siting of a habitable building that is
i. This policy recognises that some sites are unable maker, refusal should be contemplated.
not considered vulnerable may be considered in
to fully comply with the acceptable solutions of
the following limited circumstances:
the Guidelines due to complex site characteristics
a) the lot was created prior to December 2015; and/or environmental values, but through
and the use of innovative, alternative bushfire risk
b) there are demonstrated site characteristics management measures may be able to satisfy the
and/or environmental, biodiversity or outcomes of this policy.
conservation values that prevent the
ii. Where an outcomes-based approach is used, an
achievement of a radiant heat impact not
assessment is to be undertaken in accordance
exceeding 29 kW/m2 (BAL-29); and
with this policy, and the following criteria:
c) it is demonstrated that the reduction of the
a) address the acceptable solutions to the
building footprint or a redesign to manage
greatest extent possible;
or mitigate the risk, is not practical or
b) identify the non-compliance with the
appropriate.
acceptable solutions and why these cannot be
achieved;

State Planning Policy 3.7
5
Bushfire
November 2024
DEFINITIONS Bushfire hazard issues: issues identified Bushfire risk: the chance of a bushfire igniting,
during the examination of the results of the bushfire spreading and causing damage to people, property and
Bushfire Attack Level (BAL): a means of assessment, environmental considerations and broader infrastructure.
measuring the severity of a building’s potential exposure landscape (where necessary), for a planning proposal.
to ember attack, radiant heat and direct flame contact, Identified issues are to be addressed through the Bushfire risk management measures: means
using increments of radiant heat expressed in kilowatts bushfire protection measures and/or may need special the application of the bushfire protection criteria
per metre squared, and the basis for establishing the consideration. contained in the Planning for Bushfire Guidelines (2024).
requirements for construction to improve protection of
building elements from attack by bushfire. This is set out Bushfire Hazard Level (BHL) assessment: Development site: means that part of a lot on
in the Australian Standard 3959: Construction of buildings in a pre- or post-development assessment that provides which a building(s) that is the subject of development
bushfire-prone areas, as referenced in the Building Code of a measure of the likely intensity of a bushfire and the stands or is to be constructed, as defined in the Planning
Australia (as amended). likely level of bushfire attack on a site determined by and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations
categorising and mapping land as having a low, moderate 2015, section 78A.
BAL assessment: an assessment prepared in or extreme BHL in accordance with the methodology set
accordance with AS 3959 or Planning for Bushfire out in the Guidelines. Habitable Building: means a permanent or
Guidelines, to determine a bushfire attack level (BAL). temporary structure on land that –
Bushfire emergency plan (BEP): a documented
a. Is fully or partially enclosed; and
BAL Contour Map: a BAL Contour Map is a scale scheme of assigned responsibilities, actions and
b. Has at least one wall of solid material and a roof of
map of the subject lot(s) illustrating the potential radiant procedures, required in the event of a bushfire
solid material; and
heat impacts and associated indicative BAL ratings in emergency. It consists of the preparedness, prevention
reference to classified vegetation. The BAL Contour Map and response activities. c. Is used for a purpose that involves the use of the
is to be prepared in accordance with the Planning for interior of the structure by people for living, working,
Bushfire Guidelines. Bushfire management plan (BMP): A document studying or being entertained, as defined in the
that sets out short, medium and long-term risk Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Broader Landscape Assessment (BLA):
management strategies for the life of the development. Regulations 2015.
the BLA examines the area external to the planning
proposal, extending for a distance of approximately Bushfire prone area: an area that has been Off-site shelter: another location, some distance
two kilometres. It provides a means of quantifying the designated by the FES Commissioner under s. 18P of away from the site that is able to accommodate all the
characteristics and the potential impacts of bushfire in the Fire and Emergency Services Act 1998 as an area that is people being evacuated. The place is not under threat
the broader landscape, when considering the suitability subject, or likely to be subject, to bushfires. from a bushfire.
of a location for the intensification of land use or
development. Bushfire protection criteria: an outcomes-based On-site shelter: an on-site location where people
system of assessing bushfire risk management measures facing an immediate threat to their personal safety or
Bushfire: a generic term that may include fire involving contained in the Guidelines. property can gather and seek shelter from the threat of
grassfire, scrub fires or forest fire. a bushfire.

State Planning Policy 3.7
6
Bushfire
November 2024
Strategic planning proposal: any strategic-level • involves visitors who are unfamiliar with the
planning document or proposal including regional surroundings.
and sub-regional frameworks, region schemes and
amendments, sub-regional strategies, structure plans, Examples are provided within the Guidelines.
local planning strategies and local planning scheme
reviews, scheme amendments, but does not include
structure plans where the lot layout and/or the internal
road layout is known.
Subject site: the entirety of the lot(s), subject to and
affected by the planning proposal.
Suitable destination: an area that is not designated
as bushfire prone on the Map of Bush Fire Prone Areas or
is greater than 100 metres from classified vegetation, or
50 metres from Class G Grassland, as per AS 3959 and
can provide protection during and after a bushfire event.
A suitable destination is located within an urban area,
townsite or similar. This also includes any evacuation
centre, dedicated by the local government, for use during
a bushfire event.
Unacceptable bushfire risk: a level of risk that is
so high that bushfire risk management measures are not
considered appropriate and only avoidance enables the
elimination of the risk.
Vulnerable land use: a land use which:
• is designed to accommodate people who are less
physically or mentally able and likely to present
evacuation challenges; and/or
• due to the building design or use, or the number of
people accommodated, likely to present evacuation
challenges; and/or