CheckPointThreatExtractionsecuredthisdocument GetOriginal
Local Planning
Policy 2.2
Split Density Codes and
Energy Efficiency and
Sustainability Schedule
fremantle.wa.gov.au

Split Density Codes and Energy Efficiency
and Sustainability Schedule
Statutory background
The Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (the
Regulations) provide the ability for local governments to prepare a local planning policy on
any matter relevant to the planning scheme area.
Clause 4.3.4 of Local Planning Scheme No. 4 (the Scheme) prescribes the matters on which
the Council is required to be satisfied in order to grant a higher density code to land having
a split code.
Introduction and purpose
The Scheme map identifies several areas that are subject to split residential density codes
(e.g. R35/R40). These areas are the subject of clause 4.3.4 of the Scheme, which states
that:
“Where a site is identified as having a split density coding and is connected to reticulated
sewerage, the higher code may only be applied where one or more of the following specific
requirements are addressed to the satisfaction of Council:
(a) a building of cultural heritage significance is retained on the lot,
(b) provision of “low income housing”,
(c) buildings designed in accordance with Council’s energy efficiency and sustainability
schedule, and
(d) removal of a non-conforming use.
In all other circumstances, the lower of the two Codes prevails.”
This policy details the requirements for meeting each of these four pathways, providing
further guidance to applicants seeking to access the higher codes, and decision-makers in
assessing proposals.
Objectives
This policy assists in the consistent and effective administration of clause 4.3.4 of the
Scheme and will help the City to achieve the following strategic community objectives:
• Increase the number of sustainable, intensive and higher value land uses and
developments.
1/5

• Increase community awareness of and support for environmentally sustainable lifestyle
and investment decisions.
• Promote building energy efficiency and deliver energy with renewable technologies.
• Manage water usage through minimisation and reuse strategies.
• Facilitate and promote investment in heritage.
Increase in diversity of dwellings (including adaptive, accessible and affordable housing).
Application
This policy applies to new dwelling development in any area identified on the Scheme map
as being subject to a split residential density code, connected to reticulated sewer.
However, it does not apply to renovations and/or additions to existing dwellings.
Policy statement
Part A - Split Density Codes – Requirements to satisfy
1. Retention of a building of cultural heritage significance
1.1 In this case a building of cultural heritage significance shall be taken to mean a building
on the State Register of Heritage Places or the City of Fremantle Heritage List. The
Council may, at its discretion, accept a building which is not on the State Register or
Heritage List as having cultural significance where:
(a) this significance is demonstrated by the applicant through submission of a report
prepared by an accredited heritage professional responding to the City’s heritage
assessment criteria and policy; and
(b) The landowner nominates the place for inclusion on the Heritage List.
1.2 In seeking approval under this pathway, applicants shall also submit a schedule of
conservation works that will be undertaken on the property to achieve a positive
conservation outcome, to the satisfaction of the City.
1.3 The higher density code may be granted on the basis of retention of a building of
cultural heritage significance in the case of either subdivision or development of land.
Where a higher density coding has been granted on the basis of retention of a building
of cultural heritage significance:
(a) In the case of development, a condition will be imposed on the approval requiring
that the building be retained and (where applicable) conservation works in
accordance with the approved schedule of conservation works undertaken.
(b) In the case of subdivision, a condition will be recommended to the Western
Australian Planning Commission requesting that a Restrictive Covenant be placed
on the title of the new lot containing the building to be retained restricting future
owners from demolition of the building and (where applicable) conservation
2/5

works in accordance with the approved schedule of conservation works
undertaken.
2. Provision of ‘low income housing’
2.1 The term ‘low income housing’ is defined in the Scheme. A higher density coding may
be granted based on the provision of such housing in the case of either subdivision or
development of land.
2.2 The higher density code may be granted on the basis of retention of provision of ‘low
income housing’ in the case of either subdivision or development of land. Where a
higher density coding has been granted on the basis of provision of ‘low income
housing’:
(a) In the case of development, a condition will be imposed on the approval requiring
that the new dwelling(s) be restricted in use to comply with the definition of ‘low
income housing’ contained in Schedule 1 of the Scheme;
(b) In the case of subdivision, a condition will be recommended to the Western
Australian Planning Commission requesting that a Restrictive Covenant be placed
on the title of the vacant lot restricting future development and use of the land
to purposes which comply with the definition of ‘low income housing’ contained
in Schedule 1 of the Scheme.
3. Energy Efficiency and Sustainability Schedule
3.1 The Energy Efficiency and Sustainability Schedule referenced in Clause 4.3.4 b of the
Scheme is shown as Part B of this policy.
3.2 The higher density coding may be granted on the basis of compliance with the Energy
Efficiency and Sustainability Schedule in the case of either subdivision or development
of land.
3.3 Where the higher density code is sought based on compliance with the Energy
Efficiency and Sustainability Schedule:
(a) In the case of a development application, the applicant is required to
demonstrate as part of the application that the new dwelling(s) to be constructed
on the site will comply with the required elements of the Energy Efficiency and
Sustainability Schedule which is contained as Part B of this policy;
(b) In the case of subdivision, a condition will be recommended to the Western
Australian Planning Commission requesting that a Restrictive Covenant be placed
on the title of the vacant lot(s) requiring that the land may not be developed or
used in any manner which is not in accordance with the City of Fremantle Energy
Efficiency and Sustainability Schedule.
4. Removal of a non-conforming use
4.1 The term ‘non-conforming use’ is defined in the Scheme.
4.2 The higher density coding may be granted based on the basis of removal of a non-
conforming use in the case of either subdivision or development of land. In
3/5

both cases, a condition shall be imposed or recommended requiring that the use be
ceased.
Part B - Energy Efficiency and Sustainability Schedule
1. All of the following requirements must be achieved in order to comply with the City’s
Energy Efficiency and Sustainability Schedule:
1.1 The dwelling shall be designed and constructed to a Nationwide House Energy Rating
Scheme (NatHERS) star rating a minimum of one star in excess of the current energy
efficiency requirement of the Building Codes of Australia for class 1A buildings, or an
equivalent demonstrating comparable energy efficiency. The energy efficiency rating
for the dwelling shall be certified by a suitably qualified and accredited energy assessor
using accredited software and shall be provided at the development application stage;
and
1.2 Provision of a minimum 3kW photovoltaic solar panel system; and
1.3 Provision of:
(a) a minimum 3000L capacity rainwater tank plumbed to either a toilet or laundry
within the dwelling; or
(b) an approved greywater reuse system that collects greywater from the laundry
and bathroom and re-directs it for garden irrigation/ground water recharge; or
(c) successful registration of an existing tree on the City’s Significant Tree and
Vegetation Areas Register and its subsequent retention;
and
1.4 Specification of solar, electric heat pump or PV-connected electric storage water
heaters and electric (non-gas) cooking appliances.
2. The following conditions of approval will be placed on all relevant planning approvals:
2.1 The dwelling must be constructed to achieve a NatHERS accredited energy efficiency
star rating of [insert relevant star rating] stars that is certified by a NatHERS
accredited energy assessor to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive Officer, City of
Fremantle;
2.2 Prior to occupation, a minimum 3kW photovoltaic solar panel system shall be installed
and maintained thereafter to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive Officer, City of
Fremantle; and
2.3 Prior to occupation, a 3000L rainwater tank plumbed to a toilet and/or laundry shall
be installed and maintained thereafter to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive Officer,
City of Fremantle; or, if a greywater reuse system is provided instead of a rainwater
tank, the condition shall state:
Prior to occupation, an approved greywater reuse system that collects greywater from
the laundry and bathroom and re-directs it for garden irrigation/ground water recharge
shall be installed and maintained thereafter to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive
4/5

Officer, City of Fremantle; or, if a significant tree is to be retained, two conditions shall
be imposed stating:
1) The (insert tree) as shown on the approved plan shall be maintained as part of
the development, and shall not be removed unless further approval of the City
of Fremantle is granted; and
2) The significant tree identified on the approved plan shall be protected during all
phases of development in accordance with AS4970-2009 – Protection of Trees
on Development Sites.
2.4 Prior to occupation, solely solar, electric heat pump, or PV-connected electric storage
water heaters and electric (non-gas) cooking appliances to be installed.
In cases where an applicant demonstrates that the requirements of clause 1.2 and/or 1.3
of Part B cannot reasonably be met, Council may accept the achievement of an additional
half (0.5) star NatHERS star rating in lieu of each of the items at clause 1.2 and/or 1.3 as
an alternative means of complying with this policy.
Responsibility and review information
Responsible officer: Manager Strategic Planning and City Design
Document 17 October 2007 – C0710-04
adoption/approval
details
Document 16 April 2014 – PSC1404-74
amendment details
19 January 2022 – PC2201-10
Next review date 19 January 2026
5/5