OFFICIAL
Local Planning
Policy 2.9
Residential Streetscapes
fremantle.wa.gov.au

OFFICIAL
Residential Streetscapes
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. This policy may be cited as Local Planning
Policy 2.9 – Residential Streetscapes (LPP 2.9).
Introduction
The City of Fremantle has long established streetscapes and the local government aims to
maintain the pattern of development that has historically occurred along streets and
within suburbs.
Objectives
The objectives of this Policy are to:
• Reduce the dominance of garages and carports on the streetscape;
• Maintain the traditional streetscapes of established areas;
• Ensure changes are not detrimental to the amenity of adjoining lots or the locality.
Application of this Policy
This general Policy applies to all residential development assessed under Volume 1 of the
Residential Design Codes (R-Codes) except:
• where a property is a heritage-protected place, which includes all those within a
heritage area; or
• where provisions are contained within a Local Planning Policy, Local Development
Plan or Structure Plan pertaining to a more localised area.
Refer to Local Planning Policy 3.6 Heritage-protected Places Built Form and Land Use for
criteria for development of heritage-protected places.
In the event that there is a conflict between this general Policy and a provision contained
within another planning instrument dealing with a specific area, the provision within the
specific instrument shall prevail.
The deemed-to-comply criteria in this Policy replace the specified deemed-to-comply clauses
of the R-Codes. Where a R-Codes clause or sub-clause is not referred to in this Policy, that
clause remains as per the R-Codes. Where any development does not meet the deemed-to-
comply criteria, it is to be assessed against the Design Principles of the R-Codes, the Local
Housing Objectives of this Policy (as relevant), and the objectives of this Policy.
1/6

OFFICIAL
Policy Provisions
R-Codes Volume 1, Parts B & C
1. Part B, cl. 5.1.2 – Street setback
Part C, cl. 3.3 – Street setbacks
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
Volume 1, Part B, cl. 5.1.2 (C2.1(i) & (iii), C2.4)
Volume 1, Part C, cl. 3.3 (C3.3.1)
Local Housing Objectives (Design Principles)
1.1 In addition to the existing design principles of R-Codes clauses 5.1.2 or 3.3 (as
appropriate), the local government shall have regard as to whether:
a) the reduced setback does not result in a projecting element into an established
streetscape vista by virtue of the road and/or lot layout in the locality or the
topography of the land; and
b) the setback allows sufficient space for tree retention, planting and other
landscaping.
Deemed-to-comply (Part B)
Note that heritage areas are excluded from all provisions in this Policy as set out in
the ‘Application of this Policy’ section above.
C2.1 Buildings, including porches, balconies, verandahs, or equivalent (either
enclosed or unenclosed), set back from the primary street boundary:
i. In accordance with the following table:
Table 1.1a: Primary Street Setbacks
Suburb Ground Floor Setback Upper Floor Setback
Fremantle 5m 7m
North Fremantle 5m 7m
Beaconsfield 7m 10m
White Gum Valley 7m 10m
South Fremantle Outside of the Heritage Area: As per R-Codes
Samson As per R-Codes
O’Connor As per R-Codes
Hilton Outside of the Heritage Area: As per R-Codes
For purposes of this clause, ground floor setbacks apply to wall heights up to
4m on the street elevation. Above this height, the upper floor setbacks apply.
2/6

OFFICIAL
iii. Within the suburbs of South Fremantle, Samson, O’Connor and Hilton
only (excluding Heritage Areas): reduced by up to 50 per cent provided
that the area of any building, including a garage encroaching into the
setback area, is compensated for by at least an equal area of open
space that is located between the street setback line and a line drawn
parallel to it at twice the setback distance, with such ground floor area
occupied by a minimum 50% soft landscaping (refer Figure 2a and 2c
of the R-Codes Volume 1);
C2.4 Refer to C2.1(iii) above.
Deemed-to-comply (Part C)
C3.3.1
Buildings are set back from the street boundary in accordance with Table 1.1a above.
Minor projections, such as chimneys, eaves, window hoods and other architectural
features, are acceptable provided they do not project more than 0.75m into the street
setback.
WAPC Approval Required? Date Approved By WAPC
No N/A
2. Part B, cl. 5.2.1 - Setback of garages and carports
Part C, cl. 3.3 – Street setbacks
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
Volume 1, Part B, cl. 5.2.1 (C1.1, C1.2)
Volume 1, Part C, cl. 3.3 (C3.3.4, C3.3.5)
Local Housing Objectives (Design Principles)
2.1 In addition to the existing design principles of R-Codes clauses 5.2.1 or 3.3 (as
appropriate), the local government shall have regard as to whether:
a) the proposed garage or carport is consistent with the design and setback of
comparable garages or carports within the prevailing streetscape;
b) the reduced setback does not result in a projecting element into an established
streetscape vista by virtue of the road and/or lot layout in the locality or the
topography of the land;
c) the setback allows sufficient space for tree planting and other landscaping; or
d) the carport is lightweight in construction, simple in design and is visually
subservient to the form and proportion of the dwelling.
3/6

OFFICIAL
Deemed-to-comply (Parts B & C)
C1.1 & C3.3.4
i. Garages and carports set back in line with or behind the front wall of the dwelling.
C2.1 & C3.3.5
Carports may be located in front of the dwelling where:
i. The entire carport (including roof, eaves and pillars/posts) is set back a
minimum of 1.5m from primary and secondary street boundaries;
ii. Pillars and posts have a maximum dimension of 450mm by 450mm;
iii. The carport does not exceed a maximum height of 3 metres above natural
ground level as viewed from the street;
iv. Where any portion projects into the primary street setback, such portion is
open on all sides but may have doors or gates provided they meet the
deemed-to-comply criteria of the City’s Local Planning Policy 2.8: Fences (or
another area-specific instrument if applicable);
v. Except for doors or gates specified in (iv) above, the construction allows an
unobstructed view between the dwelling and the street, right-of way or
equivalent;
vi. The maximum width of the carport is 6 metres on a property with a frontage
of 12 metres or greater, and 3 metres on a property with a frontage of less
than 12 metres; and
vii. The carport is set back from the side lot boundaries in accordance with table
2a of Part B or Table 3.4a of Part C (whichever is applicable) of the R-Codes
Volume 1 except that pillars and posts may be built up to the lot boundary
where the carport is less than 10m in length and the above subclauses are
met.
Note 1: Carports, patios, verandahs or equivalent structures will need to comply with the NCC
requirements, including but not limited to fire separation and non-combustible materials.
Note 2: Vehicle sightlines of cl. 5.2.5 of the R-Codes will also need to be met, which requires
structures truncated or reduced within 1.5m of where a driveway intersects a street, right of way
or communal street as shown in the figure below.
4/6

OFFICIAL
WAPC Approval Required? Date Approved By WAPC
No N/A
3. Part B, cl. 5.1.6 – Building Height
Part C, cl. 3.2 - Building Height
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
Nil
Local Housing Objectives (Design Principles)
3.1 In addition to the existing design principles of R-Codes clauses 5.1.6 or 3.2 (as
appropriate), the local government shall have regard as to whether:
a) the proposed height is consistent with the predominant height of development
within the prevailing streetscape; and/or
b) the additional height is the result of the sloping topography of the site.
WAPC Approval Required? Date Approved By WAPC
No N/A
4. Part B, cl. 5.3.5 – Vehicular access
Part C, cl. 3.7 - Access
Deemed-to-comply provisions being modified
Part B cl. 5.3.5 (C5.2)
Part C cl. 3.7 (C3.7.3ii)
Local Housing Objectives (Design Principles)
Refer to the Design Principles of the R-Codes clauses 5.3.5 or 3.7 (as appropriate).
Deemed-to-comply (Part B)
C5.2
Driveways to primary or secondary street provided as follows:
• driveways serving four dwellings or less not narrower than 3m at the street
boundary; and
• no driveway wider than 4.5m at the street boundary and driveways in aggregate
no greater than 6m for any one property.
Deemed-to-comply (Part C)
C3.7.3ii
ii. Driveways must be a maximum 4.5m wide at the street boundary.
WAPC Approval Required? Date Approved By WAPC
Yes 31 March 2020
5/6

OFFICIAL
Definitions
Prevailing streetscape means the street setbacks of the 3 properties, where
appropriate, adjoining either side of the subject site, fronting the
same street and in the same street block.
In the case of a corner lot where the dwelling is orientated to the
splay, the characteristics of the adjoining three properties, where
appropriate, facing both streets shall be considered.
Greater weight may be given to the characteristics of the two
immediately adjoining properties on either side of the subject
site fronting the same street(s).
For the purpose of this definition, properties separated by a
street shall not be considered ‘adjoining’.
Local Planning Policy – Document Control
Responsible Officer Previous Policy Title Next Review Date
Manager City Planning N/A (four years)
13 May 2030
Version Decision to Adopt/Amend Brief Details of Modifications
1 19 Feb 2013 - OCM Adoption
2 6 May 2014 - OCM Consolidate and clarify elements
3 28 Nov 2018 - OCM Introduce crossover widths
4 13 May 2026 – OCM – C2605-10 Place into deemed-to-comply format, revert to
R-Codes for some setbacks
Public Consultation Yes
WAPC Approval Required? Yes Date approved by WAPC 31 March 2020
6/6