115/2024
Planning Bulletin 115/2024
Short-Term Rental Accommodation (STRA) –
Guidance for local government
18 September 2024
1. Purpose between local government areas as • a state-wide development approval
well as challenges in those areas where exemption for ‘hosted short-term
The Planning & Development (Local tourism accommodation and local rental accommodation’ (includes
Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 housing issues require more strategic ancillary dwellings); and
(LPS Regulations) have been amended consideration.
• a 90-night (cumulative) exemption
to facilitate planning changes for short-
In November 2023, the Western within a 12-month period for
term rental accommodation (STRA).
Australian Planning Commission ‘unhosted short-term rental
Alongside the state-wide Registration
(WAPC) released its Position Statement: accommodation’ in the Perth
Scheme, which will be mandatory
Planning for Tourism and Short-Term metropolitan area.
for all STRA as of 1 January 2025,
Rental Accommodation (Position
the amended LPS Regulations are a Local governments and other key
Statement). Along with associated
key part of the State Government’s stakeholders were consulted on these
Guidelines, it outlines the WAPC’s
commitment to ensure there is fair and changes to the LPS Regulations in April
position for clearer, more consistent
consistent regulation and management and May 2024, with feedback received
regulation of STRA in planning
of STRA across the State’s planning incorporated into the final amended
frameworks.
system. LPS Regulations.
The release of the Position Statement
Local government will play an important
complemented other whole-of-
role in implementing these changes 3. Objectives
government reforms relating to STRA,
through local planning frameworks.
responding to recommendations made
Most significantly, new ‘deemed’ land To outline the steps and timeframes for
in the 2019 parliamentary enquiry
use classes for STRA have taken effect implementing recent changes to the
Levelling the Playing Field: Managing
and are automatically read into every LPS Regulations for STRA.
the impact of the rapid increase of
local planning scheme to which they
short-term rentals in Western Australia.
apply.
4. Amending Local
Information relating to the full suite
Amendments to local planning schemes
Planning Schemes
of reforms, including the state-wide
are needed to incorporate the new
STRA Register and Incentive Scheme
‘deemed’ land uses into zoning tables,
Amendments to local planning schemes
administered by the Department of
as well as remove any superseded land
to complement and align with new
Energy, Mines, Industry Regulation
uses where relevant.
‘deemed’ land use classes for short-
and Safety (DEMIRS), can be
Local governments are encouraged accessed via the Short-Term Rental term rental accommodation will need
to incorporate other new and revised Accommodation Initiatives website. to be initiated as soon as possible
‘model’ land use classes and general and should ideally be completed by
definitions, that relate to tourism The Position Statement foreshadowed mid-2025, to allow for development
development, into their schemes where a series of amendments to Schedules 1 approvals to be obtained by 1 January
practicable. and 2 of the LPS Regulations, which as 2026.
of September 2024 are in force. These
This Planning Bulletin has been include: To assist local government in meeting
updated from a previous version these timeframes, all scheme
released in November 2023. It provides • new ‘deemed’ general and land amendments relating to STRA will be
a summary of the local planning use definitions to ensure hosted processed as a priority once submitted
scheme expectations resulting from and unhosted short-term rental to the WAPC for assessment.
accommodation are considered
these changes, as well as clarifying
Appendices 1 and 2 provide an
as dedicated land use classes in
interpretation matters and outlining next
overview of planning framework
planning schemes;
steps for implementation.
changes arising from the STRA
• new ‘model’ land use class of regulatory changes, including indicative
‘tourist and visitor accommodation’ timeframes and contacts for further
2. Background
to supersede and consolidate information.
a number of land use terms for
With the rising emergence of online
traditional accommodation, as Scheme Amendments – ‘Deemed’
booking platforms, there has been a
well as other changes to general STRA Land Uses
lack of clarity on how STRA should
definitions;
be approached, including whether To ensure consistency across
it should be a stand-alone land use local planning schemes as well as
class. This has led to inconsistency alignment with the Short-Term Rental
1

Accommodation Act 2024 (STRA style accommodation that do not fall 5. ‘Deemed’ Development
Act 2024), all local governments shall within the definition for ‘hosted short- Approval Exemptions
incorporate two new ‘deemed’ STRA term rental accommodation’.
land use classes into the zoning table of Development Approval – New
While ‘tourist and visitor
their local planning scheme by either: Exemptions
accommodation’ is not a ‘deemed’
• including ‘hosted short-term rental definition, it is strongly encouraged Amendments to the LPS Regulations
accommodation’ and ‘unhosted to be included in local planning have introduced two new ‘deemed’
short-term rental accommodation’ schemes going forward, ensuring a development approval exemptions.
where no uses of a similar nature clearer differentiation between STRA
have existed previously; or and traditional accommodation uses. Hosted STRA
This new use, and deletion of relevant
• deleting superseded uses – in most ‘Hosted short-term rental
superseded uses, may be incorporated
cases ‘bed and breakfast’ and accommodation’ is exempt state-
into schemes as part of the same
‘holiday house’ – and replacing wide and applies to all dwelling types
amendment as the above-mentioned
these with ‘hosted short-term rental with no time restrictions. The State
STRA uses.
accommodation’ and ‘unhosted Government’s position on this matter
short-term rental accommodation’. This new model use class is was set through the release of the
not intended to replace other Position Statement in November 2023.
In all schemes, both metropolitan and
accommodation types such as lodging
regional, ‘hosted short-term rental It is important to note that ‘hosted
houses. These are not considered
accommodation’ should be listed short-term rental accommodation’ will
STRA or traditional accommodation for
as P use in all zones where any type still require registration with the STRA
the purposes of these changes. Such
of dwelling is capable of approval, Register, ensuring regulatory oversight.
land uses will continue to be classed as
reflecting the state-wide development
‘residential buildings’. Ancillary dwellings (granny flats) are
approval exemption in the LPS
considered to be ‘hosted short-term
Regulations. Further to this, revised general
rental accommodation’ when the ‘host’
definitions of ‘cabin’ and ‘chalet’ and
For local governments within the resides on site in either the primary or
the amended land use definition of
boundaries of the Metropolitan Region ancillary dwelling. This is because, by
‘road house’ can be introduced, along
Scheme (MRS), ‘unhosted short-term definition, ancillary dwellings can only
with deletion of the general definition for
rental accommodation’ should be listed occur on the same site as another
‘short-term accommodation’.
as a D or A use in zones where any type of dwelling (i.e. single, grouped
type of dwelling is capable of approval, Classification of Scheme Amendments or multiple). This is further reinforced
a P use in Tourism zones and an X use by the general deemed definition of
within all other zones, reflecting the The classification of amendments is ‘short-term rental arrangement’, which
direction set in the Position Statement. at the discretion of the individual local provides the ability for a dwelling, or
government, however, the following part of a dwelling, to be used as STRA.
The State Government is aware of a provides a guide on scenarios where a
small number of local governments ‘basic’ or ‘standard’ amendment stream Unhosted STRA
within the boundaries of the MRS might apply.
‘Unhosted short-term rental
who currently exempt STRA from the
requirement to obtain development Scheme amendments that propose to accommodation’ within the Perth
approval. These exemptions will need replace superseded land use classes metropolitan area is exempt from
to be removed to achieve consistency with the new STRA land uses, without requiring development approval for
with the amended LPS Regulations and changes to permissibility in the zoning a period of up to 90-nights within a
Position Statement. table, can generally be processed as a 12-month period from the date of
‘basic’ amendment. registration. This exemption is intended
Local governments in regional areas, for ad hoc situations in a person’s
(i.e. outside of the MRS area), may If an amendment introduces or changes primary place of residence, such as
designate ‘unhosted short-term rental permissibility for new STRA and when they are away on holidays. The
accommodation’ as they see fit within traditional accommodation uses, or exemption cannot be undone through a
each scheme zone to suit local tourism, introduces supplemental development local planning policy.
housing or other relevant conditions. standards or other scheme provisions,
it will generally be progressed as a The STRA Register will track booking
Scheme Amendments – ‘Model’ ‘standard’ amendment. events to monitor compliance with this
Definitions exemption. Notifications will be sent
A model scheme amendment to operators who are approaching
The changes also introduce a new document has been prepared by the the 90-night limit advising of the
‘model’ land use class of ‘tourist Department of Planning, Lands and requirement to obtain development
and visitor accommodation’, Heritage (DPLH) and can be used by approval to continue the use beyond
which supersedes traditional local governments in aligning their the exemption period. A change of use
accommodation uses including ‘holiday local planning schemes with the LPS development application requirement is
accommodation’, ‘motel’, ‘serviced Regulations and the Position Statement. triggered once the 90-night exemption
apartment’, ‘tourist development’ If not already received, please contact has been exhausted.
and similar. This new definition sits your applicable schemes or area
separately to the retained ‘hotel’ use team at DPLH to obtain a copy of this
class and is also intended to include amendment template.
farm stays and larger bed and breakfast
2

Development Assessment and Approval The LPS Regulations amended for registers which may have been in place
– Unhosted STRA STRA also introduce a new ‘deemed’ prior to proclamation of the STRA Act
clause 78B(1A), to ensure that exempt 2024.
The assessment of development
short-term rental accommodation
applications for changes of use All STRA are required to register prior
proposals situated within bushfire prone
to ‘unhosted short-term rental to operation – regardless of whether
areas, remain as such. This would apply
accommodation’ will generally be a they are ‘hosted’ or ‘unhosted’, or
in instances where the use is permitted
matter for the local government to whether they qualify for a development
in a zone, or otherwise exempt through
consider on a case-by-case basis, approval exemption through the LPS
cl. 61 of the ‘deemed provisions’.
having regard to any local planning Regulations. Registration is completed
policies prepared (refer to Local A Good Host Pack for short-term rental by either the STRA owner or tenant
Planning Policies section below). accommodation owners has been (with the owner’s consent) and is
prepared by DEMIRS, which includes renewed annually.
It is prudent to note that the premises
information from the Department of
must first be classified as a type of Under the STRA Act 2024 and
Fire and Emergency Services (DFES),
‘dwelling’ to enable the change of use, associated regulations, it is mandatory
with messaging encouraging STRA
given reference to this term within the for applicants to enter either that a
operators to ensure they have a bushfire
‘deemed’ general definition for ‘short- development approval is not required,
plan in place and to communicate this
term rental accommodation’. or the status of their development
with their guests. Further information
approval at the point of registration.
In this regard, the Residential Design can also be found via the DFES website.
This includes whether an application
Codes (R-Codes) will, in most
Local governments may also include has been approved (including their
instances, continue to apply to works
bushfire response considerations within development approval number),
associated with a short-term rental
local planning policies for STRA. submitted, refused, or not obtained.
accommodation proposal.
Local Planning Policies (LPPs) STRA accommodation providers
Local governments have the flexibility
may register their premises without
to condition occupancy numbers The Position Statement encourages the
having first obtained a development
for ‘unhosted short-term rental development of LPPs to provide further
approval, however they must comply
accommodation’ through development guidance on the consideration of STRA
with all relevant local planning scheme
approvals, should the maximum of 12 proposals. Existing LPPs relating to
requirements.
persons be considered inappropriate in STRA can continue to operate and be
relation to the size of the dwelling. Local used for assessment purposes, except Where a premises is being used for
planning policies can provide guidance where they conflict with changes to the STRA unlawfully, local governments
on when and how occupancy numbers LPS Regulations or replicate the state- may take enforcement action under
may be assessed and conditioned. wide Registration Scheme. the Planning and Development Act
2005. A designated officer of the LGA
It should also be noted that in Local government should update
may also provide the Commissioner for
zones where a type of ‘dwelling’ is existing LPPs concurrently with scheme
Consumer Protection with a certificate
discretionary, it is possible for a site amendments, to ensure alignment
under section 29 of the STRA Act.
to have multiple active development with the amended LPS Regulations
Where considered appropriate to do
approvals in-force at any one time as well as the Position Statement and
so, the Commissioner may exercise
allowing for changes of use between Guidelines.
their discretionary power to suspend
STRA and a ‘dwelling’ without the need
To assist, a Local Planning Policy or cancel registration based on the
to obtain further approval.
Guidance document has been grounds listed in the STRA Act 2024.
Where a development approval is prepared, in collaboration with the
Strategic Planning Implications
required under a scheme for ‘unhosted WA Local Government Association
short-term rental accommodation’, a (WALGA). This document provides Registration data will, over time, allow
local government can consider any direction on a number of matters which local governments to make more
relevant matter under clause 67 of the can be considered when preparing local informed strategic decisions based on
‘deemed provisions’. planning policies for the assessment the actual number, type and location
of ‘unhosted short-term rental of registered STRA premises within a
Bushfire Considerations
accommodation’. A copy of this policy particular municipality.
Changes to the State Government’s guidance is available at the WALGA
Any further action taken based on this
bushfire planning framework detail that website.
data would need to be considered
a ‘vulnerable land use’ does not include
holistically in the context of a broader
a change of use in an existing single
6. State-Wide STRA population and housing analysis
house or ancillary dwelling; including
undertaken through a local planning
Register
STRA. The proposed changes will
strategy review.
also make clear that Part 10A of the
The state-wide STRA Register,
‘deemed provisions’ will be mostly Further guidance on strategic planning
established by the STRA Act 2024,
concerned with the construction aspect considerations for STRA and tourism
is now operational. Registration for
of development (i.e. not changes to more broadly is provided in the Position
all STRA will be mandatory by
use). Statement and Guidelines.
1 January 2025. The Register replaces
any existing local government STRA
3

7. Communication
and advice to STRA
operators
Changes to planning schemes may
create uncertainty for existing STRA
operators who have not previously
required development approval, or
where such requirements have been
unclear or not consistently enforced.
Local governments should consider
how best to communicate relevant
planning changes to their communities
and/or existing STRA operators, to
allow for development approvals to be
obtained by 1 January 2026. STRA
owners and operators may contact their
local government seeking information
about approval requirements that
currently exist, or may be introduced in
their area.
Any communication from local
government on planning requirements
should also make it clear that obtaining
a development approval is a separate
process to registration, which is to
be done online through the DEMIRS
registration portal. Local governments
undertaking ‘standard’ amendments to
implement the new STRA and tourism
land use classes may wish to consider
communications approaches during the
amendment consultation period.
To assist, a dedicated website Short-
Term Rental Accommodation Planning
Reforms has been established to
provide information to STRA operators
and other interested parties. The
website includes various FAQs, as well
as links to the Position Statement and
Guidelines.
Further Information
Further information on the Position
Statement and LPS Regulations
changes can be obtained from
tourism@dplh.wa.gov.au.
Technical enquiries regarding scheme
amendments should be directed to the
relevant schemes or area team for your
local government area.
Further information on the technicalities
of the register, including the local
government dashboard, can be
obtained via by contacting the STRA
Registration Team at DEMIRS at
straenquiries@demirs.wa.gov.au.
4

Appendix 1 – SUMMARY OF PLANNING FRAMEWORK CHANGES –
SHORT TERM RENTAL ACCOMMODATION (STRA)
TIMEFRAME FOR CONTACT FOR FURTHER
INSTRUMENT SUMMARY OF CHANGES
CHANGES INFORMATION
TNEMNREVOG
ETATS
Schedule 1 – Model Provisions: In operation. DPLH Tourism Team –
• Revised general definitions for ‘cabin’ and ‘chalet’; tourism@dplh.wa.gov.au
Local Governments to
• Consolidated land use class for ‘tourist and visitor accommodation’; amend schemes as per Part
• Deleted land use classes for various accommodation types; and 4 and Appendix 2 of this
• Revised land use definition for ‘road house’. bulletin.
Schedule 2 – Deemed Provisions:
• Land use definitions for ‘hosted STRA’ and ‘unhosted STRA’;
LPS Regulations
• General STRA definitions linking to the Short-Term Rental Accommodation Act
2024;
• Development approval exemption for hosted STRA (state-wide);
• Development approval exemption for unhosted STRA operating up to 90-nights in a
12-month period within the Perth metropolitan area (i.e. where MRS applies); and
• Exemption for STRA within bushfire prone areas.
NOTE – Position Statement and Guidelines to provide direction on the above was
previously released in November 2023.
TNEMNREVOG
LACOL
• Strategies should acknowledge the role and impacts of STRA in the local area (as As required during periodic DPLH Land Use Planning
appropriate), within tourism and housing sections. strategy review process. area or scheme team
Local Planning • Data from the Short-Term Rental Accommodation Register, accessible by local
Strategies governments, to be used as evidence to justify and inform strategic direction in
conjunction with other findings applicable to tourism accommodation and housing
supply.
Local Planning
Refer Appendix 2
Schemes
• Local governments may develop new or revised LPPs to address specific STRA Policy development DPLH Land Use Planning
planning issues in their area. concurrent with scheme area team
• These should align with the LPS Regulations Amendments as well as the WAPC’s amendment (as above)
Position Statement is encouraged to ensure
holistic consideration
Local Planning • Preparation should consider matters outlined in WALGA’s STRA Local Planning
of planning framework
Policies (LPPs) Policy Guidance document.
changes.
• LPPs should be prepared for the purpose of guiding the assessment of
development applications for unhosted STRA, given the state-wide exemption for
hosted STRA.
• LPPs cannot undo cl. 61 exemptions for hosted and unhosted STRA.

Appendix 2 – SUMMARY OF LOCAL PLANNING SCHEME CHANGES –
SHORT-TERM RENTAL ACCOMMODATION (STRA)
TIMEFRAME FOR CONTACT FOR FURTHER
SUMMARY OF CHANGES
CHANGES INFORMATION
NATILOPORTEM
HTREP
)SRM
nihtiw
.e.i(
Mandatory Amendments – by 1 January 2026: Amendments to be finalised DPLH scheme team.
preferably by mid-2025,
Introduce new ‘hosted short-term rental accommodation’ deemed use class, to replace ‘bed and Note - all scheme
and no later than 1 January breakfast’ where applicable. Assign as a ‘P’ use in all zones where any type of dwelling is capable of amendments relating to STRA
2026.
approval, to reflect state-wide exemption. will be processed as a priority.
Introduce new ‘unhosted short-term rental accommodation’ deemed use class, to replace ‘holiday
house’ and similar where applicable. Assign as a ‘D’ or ‘A’ use in all zones where any type of dwelling
is capable of approval, ‘P’ in Tourism zones and ‘X’ in remaining zones, to reflect direction in the
WAPC’s Position Statement (November 2023).
Additional Amendments:
Replace superseded model traditional and tourist accommodation land uses with new ‘tourist and
visitor accommodation’ use (note – ‘hotel’ is retained).
Introduce revised general definitions of ‘cabin’ and ‘chalet’, revised land use definition of ‘road house’
and delete general definition for ‘short-term accommodation’.
LANOIGER
)SRM
edistuo
.e.i(
Mandatory Amendments – by 1 January 2026: Amendments to be finalised DPLH area team
preferably by mid-2025,
Introduce new ‘hosted short-term rental accommodation’ deemed use class, to replace ‘bed and Note - all scheme
and no later than 1 January
breakfast’ where applicable. Assign as a ‘P’ use in all zones where any type of dwelling is capable of amendments relating to STRA
2026.
approval, to reflect state-wide exemption. will be processed as a priority.
Introduce new ‘unhosted short-term rental accommodation’ deemed use class, to replace ‘holiday
house’ and similar where applicable. Assign in zoning tables as required to reflect local housing and
tourism conditions.
Additional Amendments:
Replace superseded model traditional and tourist accommodation land uses with new ‘tourist and
visitor accommodation’ use (note – ‘hotel’ is retained).
Introduce revised general definitions of ‘cabin’ and ‘chalet’, revised land use definition of ‘road house’
and delete general definition for ‘short-term accommodation’.

Disclaimer © State of Western Australia website: www.wa.gov.au/dplh
email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
This document has been published by the Western Australian Published by the
Planning Commission. Any representation, statement, Western Australian Planning Commission tel: 08 6551 8002
opinion or advice expressed or implied in this publication is Gordon Stephenson House fax: 08 6551 9001
made in good faith and on the basis that the government, its 140 William Street National Relay Service: 13 36 77
employees and agents are not liable for any damage or loss Perth WA 6000 This document is available in alternative formats
whatsoever which may occur as a result of action taken or not Locked Bag 2506 on application to the Department of Planning,
taken, as the case may be, in respect of any representation, Perth WA 6001 Lands and Heritage Communications Branch.
statement, opinion or advice referred to herein. Professional
Published September 2024
advice should be obtained before applying the information
contained in this document to particular circumstances.
7