Non-Residential Development
Policy Type: Local Planning Policy Policy No. LPP 2.1
Policy Owner: Director Urban Planning Last Review Date: 25 October 2019
Policy Objectives
• To promote high quality architectural form to maintain and enhance the visual character of the
City.
• To ensure new buildings are designed to be of human scale to facilitate effective movement
and interaction between building and street.
• To ensure building frontages at the street level assist in the creation of safe built environments
through use of internal and external lighting, encouraging visual interest and ensuring passive
surveillance.
• To ensure that all buildings make a positive contribution to the streetscape, assisting in the
maintenance and creation of safe, secure and attractive places.
Policy Scope
The provisions of this policy apply to all non-residential development and the non-residential
element of any mixed use development proposal.
Definitions / Abbreviations Used In Policy
Operational Rooms
Defined as those rooms which are utilised for sales, meetings or congregating purposes and
excludes rooms such as bathrooms, store rooms, lobbies, hallways, plant rooms and the like.
LPS6 City of Melville Local Planning Scheme No. 6
R-Codes State Planning Policy 7.3 Residential Design Codes Volume 1 and Residential
Design Codes Volume 2 – Apartments
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:44 AM Page 1 of 10
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Policy Statement
In addition to the relevant provisions contained within LPS6 and other applicable Local Planning
Policies, non-residential development will be assessed against, and be required to demonstrate
compliance with the following provisions:
Building Design
1 General
1.1 Development should:
(a) Be orientated towards the primary street frontage.
(b) Be designed to minimise the incidence of blank and unarticulated elevations.
(c) Exhibit high levels of architectural articulation through the use of varied
architectural planes, effective fenestration, architectural detailing, external
materials, and a varied colour palette.
(d) Incorporate a differentiated design approach to the treatment of the ground floor
‘vs’ upper floor(s), achieved through varied design, use of materials, changes in
architectural planes, incorporation of awnings and the like, to enhance
pedestrian scale.
Diagram 1 – Example of high levels of architectural articulation and a
differentiated design between the ground floor level and the upper
floor.
(e) In the interests of street level activation, mixed use development should be
designed and laid out with non-residential uses at the ground floor level.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:44 AM Page 2 of 10
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

2 Corner Sites
2.1 Development on corner sites should be designed to accentuate the corner and face
all streets that flank it. This can be achieved via (but not limited to):
(a) The focussing of the building mass on the corner, using a dominant architectural
feature which protrudes above the normal roof line.
(b) The provision of additional detail, colour and textures on the corner portion of
the development.
(c) The inclusion of a dominant entrance feature on the corner.
Diagram 2 – Example of increased building mass on the corner
projecting above the normal roof line and additional detail on the
corner.
(d) Incorporation of public space on the corner.
2.2 Developments on corner sites should be designed to ensure good visibility for both
pedestrians and vehicles.
3 Front Facades and Shopfronts
3.1 Facades fronting the street and public domain should incorporate window and door
openings which provide passive surveillance.
3.2 The pedestrian scale of the development should be enhanced through the use of
windows, door openings, awnings, public art, architectural design and detailing at
ground level.
3.3 The removal of, or permanent covering of windows and openings within the shop front
or front elevation will not be supported.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:44 AM Page 3 of 10
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

3.4 Shop and Showroom uses are to have areas set aside for shopfront displays or
windows which have a view across the sales floor area. The installation of shop
fittings and fixtures on the inside of shopfront windows will not be supported.
3.5 Windows at ground floor level should remain visually permeable at all times.
3.5 Reflective or heavily tinted glazing at ground floor level will not be supported.
3.6 At least 60% of the total length of the ground floor level façade adjacent to a footpath
should be transparent.
Diagram 3 – Example of 60% of the ground floor level façade
being transparent.
3.7 Where they interface with the public domain, security shutters and gates are to be
visually permeable. Solid security shutters and gates will not be supported. Roller
doors of transparent design and construction will be acceptable provided they are at
least 75% visually permeable.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:44 AM Page 4 of 10
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

4 Weather Protection
4.1 Where a building abuts a footpath, awnings for weather protection should be provided
along its whole length.
Diagram 4 – Minimum awning dimensions where signage is proposed.
4.2 Where possible, the minimum depth of an awning is to be 2.5m. Where this is not
possible due to the width of the verge or any other factor, the awning is to be practical
for weather protection.
4.3 Awnings sited to enable a minimum clearance of 2.75m above ground level. Where
under-awning signage is proposed , the height of the awning should take into account
that the minimum clearance above ground level for any future signage will be 2.75m.
4.4 The awning is not to be sited within 0.5m of a kerb.
4.5 New awnings should be designed and sited to integrate with those of adjoining
buildings and structures to provide continuous cover.
Active Uses
5.1 Retail, food and beverage and other commercial uses which promote interaction and
deliver vitality within the streetscape, are encouraged to be located on the ground
floor level.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:44 AM Page 5 of 10
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Landscaping
6.1 LPS6 requires the approval of a landscaping plan for all non-residential developments
proposed across the City of Melville. These landscaping plans should be designed to
satisfy the following requirements:
(a) Where applicable, landscaping should be concentrated within the street setback
area to:
• enhance and positively contribute to the streetscape; and
• soften the appearance of the building; and
• where relevant, provide a buffer between the development and adjoining
residential properties.
(b) In addition to traditional at-grade planting, the City will consider landscaping
above ground level in the form of:
• Accessible and inaccessible ‘green roofs’;
• Well designed and maintained ‘green walls’;
• Permanent planters;
• Window boxes.
(c) Where applicable, the upgrade and ongoing maintenance of landscaping within
the street verge adjoining the development site may be acceptable.
(d) Shade trees are to be provided within at-grade car parking areas containing
more than six bays. The shade trees are to be provided at a minimum rate of
one tree per six bays. The shade trees are to be dispersed evenly throughout
the car parking area to provide shade and relief of building bulk.
6.2 It is acknowledged that in some instances, such as strip shopping areas and the like,
that the provision of on-site landscaping is not practical. In these instances,
contributions to planting or other infrastructure within the verge to increase the
amenity of the streetscape will be considered in lieu of the requirements prescribed by
LPS6.
6.3 Part 4 of LPS6 prescribes non-residential landscaping requirements. Where a
development comprises mixed use development, the LPS6 landscaping requirement
is to be calculated based upon the proportion of the development which is for non-
residential purposes only. The landscaping associated with the residential portion of
the development is to be assessed as per the R-Codes.
6.4 Where a development site contains mature trees and vegetation, developers are
encouraged to consider their retention as part of any redevelopment proposal.
6.5 Detailed landscaping plans should incorporate the use of low maintenance, water
wise plants, with a presumption in favour of the use of native West Australian species.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:44 AM Page 6 of 10
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

6.6 There is a presumption in favour of the retention of existing street trees. Approval will
not be given for the removal of street trees unless material planning circumstances
dictate the removal and where supplementary tree replanting in accordance with
Council’s Street Tree Policy is the only viable alternative.
6.7 Existing street trees located within the verge are to be protected during the
construction of the development in accordance with Australian Standard AS4970:
Protection of Trees.
Visual Privacy
7.1 Where located adjacent to existing residential properties, developments are to be
designed to satisfy the following criteria:
(a) All openings to operational rooms where the finished floor level is raised 0.5m
or more above natural ground level which overlook any part of an adjoining
residential property behind its street setback line, are to be:
• setback, in direct line of sight within the cone of vision, from the boundary of
the adjoining property, a minimum of 6m; or
• provided with permanent vertical screening to a height of 1.6m.
(b) All unenclosed outdoor spaces (balconies, decks, verandahs and the like) where
the finished floor level is raised 0.5m or more above natural ground level which
overlook any part of an adjoining residential property behind its street setback
line are to be:
• setback, in direct line of sight within the cone of vision, from the boundary of
the adjoining property, a minimum of 7.5m; or
• provided with permanent vertical screening to a height of 1.6m.
7.2 The non-residential portion of any mixed use development is to be designed to
minimise overlooking of major openings and outdoor active habitable spaces of the
multiple dwellings within the site.
Vehicle Access, Loading and Parking
8.1 Vehicle access should be provided from secondary streets or rights of way where
available. Only one access point per street is encouraged.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:44 AM Page 7 of 10
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Diagram 5 – Preferred vehicle access from secondary streets or rights of way.
8.2 Vehicle access to developments on corner lots should be located the maximum
possible distance away from the corner on the minor road or right of way.
8.3 All vehicles utilising on-site car parking bays should be able to enter and exit in a
forward gear where practicable.
8.4 On-site parking should be located behind the building line or within the building
where possible. Parking within the front setback area of a development will be
discouraged.
8.5 Areas for the loading and unloading of vehicles should be provided on site where
the non-residential portion of the development exceeds 500m² Gross Floor Area.
The loading area/s are to be of a size and in a location appropriate to the nature of
the development.
8.6 Where parking is provided within a basement or undercroft, a minimum headway
clearance of 2.85m should be provided where a loading or accessible bay is
provided within that level.
8.7 Structures (walls, fencing, services) and vegetation should not exceed 0.6m in
height within 1.5m x 1.5m of where the vehicle access way meets the street
boundary.
8.8 Prior to the initial occupation of a development, a Noise Management Plan may be
required to detail how noise associated with deliveries is to be managed. Where
necessary, limitations on delivery hours may be imposed.
8.9 The provision of bicycle parking facilities and end of trip facilities are encouraged for
all developments.
8.10 Disabled parking provided in accordance with the National Construction Code 2012
(as amended).
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:44 AM Page 8 of 10
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

Plant
9.1 All air conditioners and other similar servicing plant are to be appropriately located
and screened from the street and neighbouring properties.
9.2 Where air conditioners are to be located on balconies, details of any proposed
screening measures are to be provided. This could include measures such as
bunting around the unit, or an obscure portion of balustrade.
Waste
10.1 All developments should be provided with a bin storage area of sufficient size to
accommodate a minimum of one weeks waste and recycled material.
10.2 The bin storage area should be screened from view of the street and be located to
ensure adverse visual amenity impacts are avoided.
10.3 Bin storage areas should be located in an easily accessible location for both
occupants of the building and for rubbish collection. The design is to include
provision for easy cleaning.
10.4 Details of the proposed collection point are to be submitted at the time of
development approval.
10.5 A rubbish collection point should be nominated which is of sufficient size to contain
the number of bins required to service the building, whilst not obstructing parking
and pedestrian access, traffic flow and sightlines.
10.6 Prior to the initial occupation of a development, a Waste Management Strategy may
be required to detail how waste and the noise associated with waste disposal will be
minimised.
Site Works
11.1 Where developments are proposed across sloping sites, the principle of equal cut and
fill across the site will apply.
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:44 AM Page 9 of 10
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.

References that may be applicable to this Policy
Legislative Requirements: Planning and Development Act 2005
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015
Procedure, Process Maps, Work Instructions: Planning Application Procedure
Other Plans, Frameworks, Documents Applicable to Policy: Local Planning Scheme No. 6
State Planning policy 7.3 Residential Design Codes
Volume 1 and Residential Design Codes Volume 2 –
Apartments
Delegated Authority No: DA-020: Planning and Related Matters
References Diagrams drawn by M MacKay for City of Wanneroo
Town Centre Policy
ORIGIN/AUTHORITY Item No.
Ordinary Meeting of Council 18/06/2013 P13/3397
Reviews
Ordinary Meeting of Council 16/09/2014 P14/3541
Ordinary Meeting of Council 20/09/2016 P16/3718
Administrative Review 27/8/2019
(Council Resolution 18/6/2019)
Uncontrolled Document When Printed - This Version: 31/10/2019 11:44 AM Page 10 of 10
Please refer to the City of Melville website (Public) or BMS (Internal) for the latest version.