Local Planning
Policy 1.1
Planning Refunds,
Amendments, and
Community Consultation
fremantle.wa.gov.au
0

Planning Refunds, Amendments, and
Community Consultation
Citation
This is a Local Planning Policy prepared under Schedule 2 of the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015. This policy may be cited as
Local Planning Policy 1.1 – Planning Refunds, Amendments, and Community Consultation
(LPP 1.1).
Introduction
The purpose of this policy is to set out various administrative and assessment procedures
relating to planning and development, specifically in regard to:
• Refunding and waiving/reducing planning fees;
• Amendments and extensions to the term of planning approval; and
• Public notification of planning proposals.
Objectives
• Part 1 outlines the circumstances where the City will waive or reduce development
application fees.
• Part 2 provides guidance on assessment of development applications for
amendments and extensions of time.
• Part 3 provides a consistent and transparent approach to determining when and
how community consultation is undertaken on planning proposals, balancing the
need for the community to be informed of, and have reasonable input into planning
proposals against the need to process these in an efficient manner within
prescribed legal timeframes and parameters.
Application of this policy
Part 1 applies to all local government development (planning) application fees charged in
accordance with the Planning and Development Regulations 2009.
Parts 2 and 3 apply to all development proposals administered or partially administered by
the City. Where the City is not the responsible authority for assessing the proposal, the
policy may be used to inform the City’s advice to the responsible authority.
Policy provisions
PART 1 – REFUNDING AND WAIVING OR REDUCING FEES
1.1. The City does not consider financial hardship, personal or family circumstances to be
grounds for the waiving or reduction of planning fees.
Waiving of Planning Fees
1.2. Planning fees will not be waived under any circumstances except by a resolution of
the Council.
1

Reduction of Planning Fees
1.3. An application for a reduction in planning fees by 50% may be approved under the
following circumstances:
a) Where the development is of less than $50,000 in value and the application is,
in the opinion of the Manager Development Approvals, similar to a previous
application determined during the preceding year to the point where previous
assessment work can significantly contribute to the assessment of the new
application;
b) Where the applicant is a ‘not for profit’ organisation and has obtained an income
tax exemption status from the Australian Taxation Office; or
c) Where the application is for a home occupation only under the Federal
Government’s Self-Employment Assistance scheme.
Where an application for a fee reduction is made under (b) or (c) above, the applicant
will be required to provide sufficient proof at the time of submitting the request.
Refund of Planning Fees
1.4. The City will consider a written request for the refund of planning fees where the
application is withdrawn prior to a determination being issued only in the following
circumstances:
a) Where, in the opinion of the Manager Development Approvals, no assessment
work has been undertaken by the City and the application is subsequently
withdrawn in writing within seven (7) business days of the date of application,
90% of application fee may be refunded.
b) Where assessment work has commenced by the City a refund of 50% of the
application fee may be approved where:
(i) The application has not been advertised; and
(ii) The application is withdrawn in writing by the applicant within 21 days of
lodgement of the application.
Costs and Expenses
1.5. The City will not waive or reduce any costs or expenses that may be charged to a
applicant where these are incurred through the provision of a service under
Regulation 49 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2009 regardless of
whether a reduced application fee under 3(a), (b) or (c) has been approved.
Variations to Planning Approvals
1.6. A reduction in fees shall not apply to applications to vary a planning approval which
has already been granted unless the need for such an application is solely
attributable to a previous administrative error in which case no fee will be charged.
Unauthorised Existing Development
1.7. The reduction or refund of planning fees will not under any circumstances apply to
applications made under Schedule 2, Part 9, clause 65 of the Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015, where a use or
development has already been commenced or carried out unlawfully and the purpose
of the application is to render that use or development lawful under the Scheme.
2

PART 2 – AMENDMENTS AND EXTENSIONS OF TIME
Term of Approval
2.1 The local government will specify a period of 4 years in which a development must
be substantially commenced, but may specify a lesser period of up to 2 years having
regard to the following factors:
a) Whether the approval required significant exercise of discretion under the
Scheme;
b) Whether there is a reasonable prospect of a material change occurring in the
physical considerations relevant to determination of the application that
provide grounds to consider the application may be determined differently in
the future; and
c) Whether a material change to the statutory or policy provisions relevant to
determination of an application is under active consideration and that may
mean the application may be determined differently in the future.
Amendment of an Approval
2.2 In determining an amendment to a planning approval, the local government will
consider whether the nature and extent of the proposed amendment is such that the
use or development the subject of the planning approval:
a) remains, in substance, the same; or
b) is changed so a new and different use or development is proposed.
2.3 If the nature and extent of the proposed amendments is such that there is a new
and different use or development to that which was the subject of the planning
approval, the local government may refuse to allow amendment of the planning
approval.
2.4 If an application to amend planning approval is refused, nothing in this policy shall
preclude the Applicant from making, and the local government from determining, a
new application for planning approval for the use or development the subject of the
amendment application.
Extension of the Term of Approval
2.5 In considering a request for an extension to the term of a planning approval, a
period of up to a further two years may be granted subject to the City having regard
to the balance of the following factors:
a) whether the planning framework has changed substantially since the
development approval was granted;
b) whether the development would likely receive approval now;
c) whether the applicant has actively and relatively conscientiously pursued the
implementation of the development approval; and
d) whether a material change has occurred to either the site to which the
planning approval relates or the surrounding locality since the planning
approval was granted that would alter the decision or any condition of
approval.
3

PART 3 – PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF PLANNING PROPOSALS
The City acknowledges that consultation provides an important input into planning decision
making, however, this is in addition to a technical assessment against the planning
framework and objectives, not in place of it.
Consultation Matrix
3.1 The following matrix provides an overview of the City’s consultation requirements for
statutory planning proposals, combining the requirements of the Regulations with
additional measures employed by the City. Consultation beyond the minimum below
may be undertaken at the discretion of the relevant manager and in accordance with
the Regulations.
Development
Scheme Amendment Local
Consultation Application Structure
LDP Planning
Requirement Plan
Policy
Standard Complex Preliminar y Basic Standard Complex
Calendar Days 14 28 28
4
Only
when
required
by
Minister
42 60 42 Min. Min.
14 21
Letters to Yes Yes Yes Yes2 Yes2 Yes Yes No
adjoining
owners/occupiers
Letters to 200m No Yes Yes2 Yes2 Yes2 Yes No No
radius
Local Newspaper No Optional No Optional Optional Optional Optional Optional
Notice
Sign on Site No Yes No Yes2 Yes2 Yes Optional No
Plans on website Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Precinct Group No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Notification
‘Talk to a Planner’ No Yes1 No No Yes Yes Optional No
session
1 Except where one of the two criteria which make the application ‘complex’ under cl. 3.11 of this policy is
(A)(iv)
2 Only for site-specific proposals
3.2 For amendments to previously advertised planning proposals, the relevant manager
may reduce or waive elements of the consultation process taking into account how
recent the previous consultation was, the level of public interest when the proposal
was originally advertised, and the extent and significance of the amendments being
made. For amendments of a minor nature, consultation may be waived except in
relation to developments applications where the amendments introduce new
discretions.
Excluded holiday period days
3.3 To provide additional time during Christmas and Easter holiday periods, the
Regulations exclude the following from the total number of days a proposal is
advertised for:

a) A period commencing on 25 December in a year and ending on the next 1
January; or
b) A period of 7 days commencing on Good Friday in a year.
Requests for extension to submissions periods in other circumstances will not be
supported, however, staff will make every reasonable effort to make the decision-maker
aware of any submissions received after the closure of the consultation period.
Definition of ‘Adjoining Property’
3.4 Where a proposal requires consultation with ‘adjoining property owner or occupiers’,
this will be deemed to apply to those properties which share any common boundary
and including diagonally opposite, across the street or those separated by a right-of-
way or access way less than 6.0m in width – refer illustrative examples below.
5

Public viewing after close of advertising
3.5 Copies of plans and documents will not be given to the public after the consultation
period unless they appear on a public agenda or minutes.
Opportunity for applicant to respond to submissions
3.6 Applicants will be advised of a summary of concerns raised in submissions (excluding
personal details such as names, etc.) and provided with the opportunity to respond.
Notification to submitters – Council meeting agendas & decisions
3.7 Where a proposal requires referral to Council, the applicant and all submitters will be
notified in writing (via post or e-mail, utilising the correspondence address from which
the submission was made) of the date at which the proposal will be listed on a Council
agenda, and will be subsequently notified of Council’s decision.
Reporting submissions to Council
3.8 Officer reports to Council will include a summary of the issues/themes raised in the
submissions received as part of the consultation process. Full copies of submissions
will be made available to Elected Members and decision-makers at their request but
will not be available to members of the public unless required by law.
3.9 For scheme amendments and structure plans, a schedule of submissions (excluding
the submitters’ personal details) will also to be included as an attachment to the
Council report. A schedule of submissions may be prepared for other complex
proposals involving a large number of submissions where this assists in summarising
public feedback, at the discretion of the relevant manager.
Development applications and subdivisions
3.10 In addition to where prescribed under the Regulations and/or the Scheme,
consultation will be carried out by the City prior to a decision being made where the
application satisfies any of criteria in the table below:
Involves the complete demolition of a building that is a heritage-protected place
as defined in the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes)
Regulations 2015, unless the building is in a Heritage Area where a list of
(A)
contributory properties in that area has been set out in a local planning policy
and the building has not been identified as ‘contributory’, nor is the building
otherwise identified as a heritage-protected place.
Involves a subdivision creating more than twenty (20) lots and the proposal has
(B) not previously been advertised as part of a scheme amendment, structure plan
or local development plan.
Involves a significant exercise of discretion in terms of the Scheme, Residential
(C)
Design Codes or local planning policy provisions.
Has significant planning impacts in terms of the implementation of a strategic
(D) planning objective, the scale of the development, or is significantly different
from the predominant and expected pattern of development within the locality.
6

Classification of development applications
3.11 Regulation 1 of the Regulations allows a local government to identify when a
development application is a ‘complex application’. For purposes of this regulation, a
complex application is one which involves:
• a use of land if the use is not specifically referred to in the zoning table for this
Scheme in respect of the zone in which the development is located; and/or
• development which meets at least two of the criteria listed in Clause 2.1 – i.e.
(A), (B), (C); and/or
• development which meets criteria (D) listed in Clause 2.1.
Consultation under the R-Codes Volume 1
3.12 Where a development application is subject to assessment against Volume 1 of the R-
Codes and involves assessment of an element/s against the Design Principles (i.e. a
discretionary decision or a ‘variation’ to the ‘deemed to comply’ provisions), the R-
Codes state that consultation should occur only where the variation is considered by
the City to have potential to impact the amenity on adjoining properties or the street,
and should be directed at those adjoining owners and occupiers likely to be affected.
The following provides direction on when and with whom consultation under the R-
Codes will occur for some common situations listed in the table below:
R-Code or Local Planning Policy Consultation Requirement
Variation
Street setback, street fences, vehicle All adjoining properties aside from those to the rear
sightlines of the subject site.
Lot boundary setback and boundary Properties located directly adjacent to the proposed
walls setback variation.
Visual privacy Properties located within the ‘cone of vision’ of the
major opening or active habitable space.
Site works/retaining walls Properties located directly adjacent to the proposed
changes to ground levels will be consulted, unless
the extent of the variation requires wider
consultation as determined by the relevant manager
Solar access (Overshadowing) Properties directly impacted by the proposed
shadow.
Internal amenity or layout Consultation for the variation will only be
undertaken at the discretion of the relevant
(e.g. open space, outdoor living area,
manager
street surveillance, storm water
management)
Dividing fences outside the street Properties located directly adjacent to the proposed
setback area fence.
3.13 Where in doubt of which adjoining properties are likely to be affected, the City will
consult with adjoining property owners and occupiers as defined in Clause 1.3.
7

Exemptions to consultation – Neighbour sign-off
3.14 The City may waive the consultation requirements for development applications
involving the exercise of discretion under Volume 1 of the R-Codes (or a local planning
policy which replaces its provisions) in cases where the affected neighbour/s explicit
sign-off is obtained for the proposed development. This must include:
• A copy of the development plans including certification by the owners and
occupiers of the affected adjoining properties clearly stating that they have no
objections to the proposal and the specific R-Code or local planning policy
discrepancies.
• Signatures of all persons shown as owners on the Certificate of Title.
• The certification must include:
The full name of the owner(s) or occupier(s) certifying non-objection
o
clearly printed, with a signature;
A printed statement indicating no objection to the
o
variations/discrepancies being sought, individually listing these; and
A printed contact address (postal or e-mail) and telephone number.
o
3.15 Neighbour sign off is no guarantee a proposal will be supported by the City. Officers
must still undertake a technical assessment of the merits of the proposal.
Consultation on applications assessed under the R-Codes Volume 2 - Apartments
3.16 In addition to consultation otherwise required under the Scheme or Regulations, the
City will consult adjoining property owners and occupiers to proposals involving
assessment against Volume 2 of the R-Codes where these propose:
a) A variation to a local planning area standard listed in Schedule 7 of the Scheme;
and/or
b) A variation to the ’acceptable outcomes’ of the R-Codes Volume 2 (or any
replacement policy) which in the opinion of the City is considered to have
potential to have a significant impact upon their amenity.
Preliminary Scheme Amendments
3.17 Prior to formally initiating a ‘Complex’ scheme amendment, Council may opt to
undertake preliminary community consultation where:
• The amendment is location-specific (i.e. relating to a particular site(s)); and
• It has the potential to result in significant physical or land use changes to a
locality; or
• Council has reservations regarding the merit of the proposal.
Council will consider comments received in response to preliminary community
consultation before deciding whether or not to initiate the scheme amendment.
Responsibility and review information
Responsible officer: Manager Strategic Planning and City Design
Document adoption/approval details 14 May 2025 – Ordinary Meeting of Council
C2505-12
Document amendment details
Next review date 14 May 2029
8