Environmentally Sustainable Design Local
Planning Policy
Responsible directorate: Planning and Community Development
Objective: To encourage the integration of environmentally sustainable design principles into the
siting, design and construction of both new and redeveloped residential, commercial
and mixed-use buildings (excluding single and grouped dwellings, internal fit outs and
minor extensions) in the City of Joondalup. Environmentally sustainable design
considers the environmental impact of a building for the entire life of the asset.
1. Authority:
This Policy has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2 of the deemed provisions
of the Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015 (Regulations)
which allows the local government to prepare local planning policies relating to planning or
development within the Scheme area.
2. Application:
This Policy shall apply to the construction and redevelopment of residential, commercial and
mixed-use buildings (excluding single and grouped dwellings, internal fit outs and minor
extensions) in the City of Joondalup.
3. Statement:
In pursuance of its commitment to sustainability, the City seeks to promote buildings which are
environmentally sustainable and strongly encourages the integration of environmentally
sustainable design principles into building design in the community.
4. Details:
4.1. Design principles:
The incorporation of the following design principles into buildings relevant to this policy is
encouraged:
• Designing and constructing buildings to preserve the natural features of the site.
Environmentally Sustainable Design 1

• Designing and constructing buildings to include passive solar design.
• Increasing the energy efficiency of buildings by using low energy technologies for
lighting, heating and cooling, appliances and equipment.
• Using renewable energy technologies.
• Increasing water efficiency and encouraging water reuse and water recycling for
buildings and landscaping.
• Selecting sustainable building materials, such as locally sourced and recycled
content.
• Reducing the amount of waste that is created through the construction process by
implementing waste management practices on site.
• Encouraging adaptability in the design and construction to ensure longevity of the
building.
• Increasing the indoor air quality of buildings by using low allergic and low volatile
organic compound (VOC) fittings, furniture, paints and adhesives.
• Utilising water wise and native gardening techniques.
• Designing buildings so materials can be easily recycled if in the future the building is
to be demolished.
4.2. City of Joondalup — Environmentally Sustainable Design Checklist:
Applications for development approval for residential, commercial and mixed-use buildings
(excluding single and grouped dwellings, internal fit outs and minor extensions) must be
accompanied by a completed Environmentally Sustainable Design Checklist.
Creation date: March 2011 (CJ041-03/11)
Formerly:
Amendments: CJ114-06/13, CJ223-12/22
Last reviewed: December 2022 (CJ223-12/22)
Related documentation: • Environmentally Sustainable Design Checklist
• Local Planning Scheme No 3
• Local Government Act 1995
File reference: 102667
Environmentally Sustainable Design 2