THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL GAZETTED COPY
GAZETTED COPIES CAN BE OBTAINED FROM STATE LAW PUBLISHER
GAZETTAL DATE: FRIDAY 18 SEPTEMBER, 1998 SPECIAL GAZETTE
NO.189
AMENDMENT NO. 1 - SMITHS BEACH GAZETTED FRIDAY 31 JANUARY
2003
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN PLANNING
COMMISSION
STATEMENT OF PLANNING POLICY No. 6.1
LEEUWIN-NATURALISTE RIDGE POLICY

1 Introduction to Policy
1.1 Policy Format
2 Vision
3 Overall Objectives
4 Policy Statements
4.1 Settlement
4.2 Nature Conservation
4.3 Landscape
4.4 Agriculture
4.5 Tourism
4.6 Cultural Heritage
4.7 Resources
5 Land Use Strategy
5.1 Settlement Hierarchy
5.2 Existing Conservation Reserves
5.3 Natural Landscape Amenity
5.4 Agricultural Protection
5.5 Primary Transport Network
Appendices
Appendix 1 Glossary of Terms
List of Figures
Figure 1 Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge Policy Area
Figure 2 Policy Format
Figure 3 Landscape Classes Map
Figure 4 Landscape Character Units
Figure 5 Land Use Strategy Plan
List of Tables
Table 1 Settlement Hierarchy

5192 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA [18 September 1998
CAPE
NATURALISTE
Eagle Bay
GEOGRAPHE BAY
DUNSBOROUGH
Yallingup CAVES BUSSELTON
ROAD
Vasse
Cla
C
ira
a
u
p
l
e
t
DAO Carbunup River
R
WAY
GH
HI
Metricup
CAVES
Cowaramup
BUSSELL
Gracetown
INDIAN
OCEAN
Cape Mentelle
Prevelly
LEGEND
Policy Area Boundary Witchcliffe
CAVES
BUSSELL
Cape Freycinet
RO HIGHWAY
AD
Hamelin
BROCKMAN
Bay
Karridale
R
HIGHW
iver
AY
Kudardup
N Cape Hamelin
0 1 2 3 4 5
Kilometres
P B r u o n d b u u c r e y d O b ff y ic C e a , r M to in g i r s a tr p y h f ic o r S P e l c a t n io n n in , g AUGUSTA
Flinders
Bay
CAPE LEEUWIN SOUTHERN
OCEAN
Black
Marga
River
w
d
oo
re
Western
Australia
Cowaramup Point
t
MARGARET
RIVER
Figure 1 - Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge Policy Area
Figure 1 - Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge Policy Area

1 Introduction to Policy
The majestic ridge line, rugged cliffs and capes, exposed slopes and incised valleys of the Leeuwin-
Naturaliste Ridge provide a spectacular backdrop for those who live in or visit this south-western
corner of Western Australia. Combined with both open and protected sandy beaches, diverse vegetation
and a rich mosaic of landscapes and land uses, the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge policy area provides
a wide range of outstanding opportunities for recreation, lifestyle, tourism and commercial activity.
These values have been identified in a number of planning documents, most recently in the State
Planning Strategy (Western Australian Planning Commission, 1997), which recognises the regional
and State significance of the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge, together with the challenges it faces from
growth pressures and competing land uses.
Rapid growth and change in the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge policy area have provided benefits to
increasing numbers of residents and visitors. But they have also resulted in increasing land use conflicts
and opposing views on management of natural and economic resources and the level of change
that will be acceptable to the various interests.
In light of these pressures for change, the Western Australian Planning Commission (WAPC) and the
Shires of Augusta-Margaret River and Busselton agreed that a clear and more certain strategic planning
tool was needed. It was recognised that a regional planning approach was required in order to
protect the unique ecological, social and landscape values and character of the policy area.
As a result, the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge Planning Review was conducted as a cooperative effort
between the WAPC and the two shires. It has resulted in the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge Statement of
Planning Policy (LNRSPP) to provide clear direction on future land use for the policy area.
The LNRSPP applies over the scenically spectacular, narrow coastal strip stretching from the nearshore
waters of Cape Naturaliste to Cape Leeuwin and inland to Bussell Highway and the eastern
extent of townsites along the highway.
The purpose of the LNRSPP is to provide the strategic planning framework for the policy area for the
next 30 years by providing greater vision, guidance and certainty of land use. It promotes sustainable
development, conservation, and land and resource management. It seeks to provide assistance to those
managing land use change, enable greater consistency between the two local governments, give clear
regional-level advice to proponents of development, and provide a reference to guide development and
conservation by improving the information available to the community.
1.1 Policy Format
The Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge Statement of Planning Policy (LNRSPP) was prepared by the Western
Australian Planning Commission under Section 5AA of the Town Planning and Development Act, 1928
(as amended). It applies to the policy area which extends from the near-shore waters of Cape Naturaliste
to Cape Leeuwin and inland to the Bussell Highway and the eastern extent of townsites found along
the highway, as defined by the inner border of the boundary shown on Figure 1. The LNRSPP has force
and effect after it has been approved by the Governor and published in the Government Gazette.
All land use and development within the policy area will be consistent with the LNRSPP read in
conjunction with the LNRSPP Policy Report, including its guidelines and actions. There are five policy
components of the LNRSPP, which should be read together.
The five components are—
• Vision
• Overall Objectives
• Policy Statements
• Land Use Strategy
• Implementation (Guidelines and Actions)
Figure 2 illustrates the five components.
The intent of the Vision and Overall Objectives is reflected as Policy Statements (general policies) for
the entire policy area. The Land Use Strategy identifies preferred land use throughout the policy area
and establishes specific land use policies. Implementation (including Guidelines and Actions) is described
in Part 4 of the LNRSPP Policy Report.

2 Vision
The LNRSPP’s Vision is to achieve—
Creative, vital and sustainable communities living in balance with economic development and the
unique landscape and environmental values of the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge policy area.
3 Overall Objectives
To achieve the Vision, the Overall Objectives of the LNRSPP are to—
• conserve and enhance the special benefits arising from landscape elements that form the fabric
of the region;
• respect and conserve its outstanding natural and cultural heritage and environmental values;
• cater for population growth consistent with the objectives of the LNRSPP and provide a range of
settlement options located to enhance the economic, social and environmental functions, while
promoting quality and innovation in urban design and built form;
• protect agricultural land for its economic, landscape, tourism and social values;
• encourage a mix of compatible land uses while separating conflicting land uses;
• facilitate a robust, diverse and sustainable economy; and
• foster a sense of community and creativity;
for the benefit of all residents and visitors and for future generations.
The objectives are not ranked in any order.

Figure 2- Policy Format
Vision Overall Policy Land Use Strategy Implementation
Objectives Statements
Creative, vital and The overall (Example) (Example) (Example)
sustainable objectives of the Agriculture- Agricultural Guidelines for
communities living LNRSPP are to: Subdivision Protection- Enclaves
in balance with • conserve and PS 4.1 Principal Agriculture LUS GS 1.1
economic enhance the special There is a general (Horticulture Criteria for
development and the benefits arising from presumption against and Grazing) establishing clustered
unique landscape landscape elements the subdivision of LUS 4.6 rural settlement in
and environmental that form the fabric agricultural land for In areas designated the form of Enclaves
values of the of the region; nonagricultural Principal will address:
Leeuwin-Naturaliste • respect and purposes. Agriculture, the • the exclusion of
Ridgepolicy area. conserve its PS 4.2 predominant use of land required for
outstanding natural Notwithstanding PS land will be potential urban
and cultural heritage 4.1, subdivision of agriculture. Other expansion of the
and environmental land designated as uses, including uses service centre, Prime
values; Agricultural of interspersed lands Agricultural
• cater for population Protection will be with lesser Land or land within
growth consistent considered under the agricultural potential, high fire hazard
with the objectives of following will be compatible areas;
the LNRSPP and circumstances— with and not • separating the
provide a range of • where the proposed jeopardise, Enclave from
settlement options subdivision does not agricultural use of surrounding land,
located to enhance detract from the adjoining prime including
the economic, social long-term viability of land. agriculture, and
and environmental the land for LUS 4.7 ensuring
functions, while agricultural use; and Agriculture compatibility of land
promoting quality • where the proposed (including uses;
and innovation in subdivision provides horticulture and • ensuring each
urban design and an opportunity to grazing) is to remain Enclave is a discrete
built form; diversify or intensify the predominant clustered settlement
• protect agricultural the agricultural use economic land use, which enhances
land for its of the land. within the constraints the overall rural
economic, landscape, Rural strata of protecting landscape and which
tourism and social subdivision will be remnant vegetation prevents coalescence
values; considered where it and landscape with other
• encourage a mix of can be demonstrated values. Enclaves;
compatible land uses the intent of strata LUS 4.8 • being within
while separating subdivision can be Subdivision of reasonable walking/
conflicting land uses; legally enforced in agricultural land cycling distance of a
• facilitate a robust, the event of the other than for service centre;
diverse and cessation of the agricultural purposes • having appropriate
sustainable economy; strata. will generally not be and efficient
and PS 4.3 permitted. infrastructure
• foster a sense of Subdivisions LUS 4.9 services that include
community and considered under PS The potential for the site being
creativity; 4.2 will comply with expansion of rural/ conducive to the
for the benefit of all the following— horticultural uses and principles of
residents and visitors • where land is to be increases in the ecologically
and for future used for irrigated function of rural sustainable
generations. horticulture, processing and development, (for
confirmation of cottage-based example, suitable
suitable soil industries will be for on-site effluent
capability and water promoted by the disposal without
supply will be establishment of: off-site effects);
required. Subdivision • rural processing • conserving remnant
should not be less activities; vegetation and
than 20 hectares; or • cottage industry; increasing overall
• where land is to be • rural associated vegetation cover,

used for viticulture tourist activities; and where appropriate;
and other intensive • recreation/tourist • managing traffic
agricultural uses, attractions in movements; and
confirmation of proximity to • fire management.
suitable soil settlement nodes or
capability and where there is no
water supply will be detrimental impact
required. Subdivision on the area’s
should not be less horticultural
than 30 hectares; or potential.
• for general
agricultural uses
including grazing,
subdivision should
not be less than
40 hectares and
where land is
proposed for
agricultural
consolidation, lots
should be capable of
supporting a
minimum of 750 Dry
Sheep Equivalent
(DSE). Areas of
remnant vegetation
will not be included
in the calculation of
the DSE.
4. Policy Statements
Introduction
The LNRSPP identifies seven generic land use related topics for which Statements of Intent and
Policies have been adopted. The seven topics identify the main land use planning issues which have a
significant impact on the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge policy area. They are—
• Settlement
• Nature Conservation
• Landscape
• Agriculture
• Tourism
• Cultural Heritage
• Resources
4.1 Settlement
Statement of Intent
Settlement Pattern
A range of innovative settlement options to accommodate population growth and ensure a choice of
accommodation types will be based on—
• major urban growth within the Principal Centres;
• other urban growth focused on inland centres;
• designated Coastal and Tourist Nodes;
• clustered rural settlement in Enclaves; and
• limiting Rural Residential living to existing designated areas.
Settlement Design
Settlement design will incorporate—
• innovative building styles which enhance the area’s unique character;
• the reinforcement of townscape principles;
• the principle of commercial (especially retail) development being located within designated
commercial zones, with major retail development being located in the Principal Centres;
• provision for tourist development;

• integration within its local environment;
• water-sensitive urban design;
• efficient servicing and energy use;
• identity and sense of place;
• effective fire protection measures; and
• encouragement of a participative design approach which includes the local community.
Settlement Servicing (Infrastructure)
The settlement objectives will be achieved by—
• promoting the primary settlement function of Principal Centres, the expansion of nominated
inland settlements, and the efficient and innovative servicing of identified rural settlement
nodes;
• supporting the use of non-conventional servicing solutions particularly in towns and other
settlements and rural locations;
• providing required infrastructure in a timely manner that has regard for development needs of
the settlements;
• establishing infrastructure programs that provide for cost sharing between developers and the
community; and
• maintaining and upgrading the existing road network.
Policies
Settlement Pattern
PS 1.1 Margaret River, Dunsborough and Augusta will continue to be the Principal Centres in the
settlement hierarchy and cater for the majority of residential, large-scale commercial and
other urban development. Busselton is located outside the policy area, but will accommodate
substantial urban growth.
PS 1.2 Other residential development will focus on the inland settlements of Vasse, Carbunup
River, Cowaramup, Witchcliffe, Karridale and Kudardup, based on the hierarchy of
settlements set out in the Land Use Strategy. Development of Metricup is dependent upon
resolving possible mining issues.
PS 1.3 The coastal settlements at Eagle Bay, Yallingup, Gracetown, Prevelly and Gnarabup will
permit a mix of tourism and residential development. The Tourist Node of Smiths Beach, defined as being land west of
Smiths Beach Road, has potential for tourist development, including short-stay accommodation.
Residential development will be permitted on Sussex Location 413 but will be secondary to the predominant tourist
function.
Subdivision and development of the identified developable area(s) of Sussex Location 413 will have a ratio of not less
than seventy percent (70%) tourist development and not more than thirty percent (30%) residential development
calculated from the developable land area. Mixed residential densities of up to a maximum R Coding of R25 under
Statement of Planning Policy No 3.1(Residential Design Codes) for residential development will be considered.
Identifiable developable land will exclude areas to be set aside for Principal Ridge Protection, national park, public
open space, or similar purposes as designated on an approved Development Guide Plan.
PS 1.4 Appropriate buffers will be established to avoid coalescence of any settlements.
PS 1.5 Rural Residential development may be permitted in the designated areas identified in the
Land Use Strategy Plan.
Settlement Design
PS 1.6 Modified grid patterns for road layouts in subdivisions will respond to landform and
vegetation features.
PS 1.7 The location of commercial centres should reinforce the central focus, function and character
of the settlements.
PS 1.8 Settlement design should provide for a range of tourist developments.
PS 1.9 Proposals for clustered rural settlement in the form of Enclaves may be supported in
locations identified in the Land Use Strategy, subject to proponents meeting appropriate
criteria established by local government, the WAPC and formulating and gaining approval for
a structure plan for the Enclave and its nearby service centre (Village or Hamlet).
PS 1.10 Innovative, clustered subdivision design will be promoted with the aim of retaining a greater
proportion of land for agricultural use and for the conservation of remnant vegetation.
PS 1.11 Proposed urban development will be assessed against a range of design criteria, including—
• water-sensitive design and other environmental features;
• landscape elements including site-specific natural attributes;
• protection of remnant vegetation;
• integration with traditional urban character;
• intrusion or damage to existing places of cultural heritage and their settings;

• common trenching of services (where possible);
• access by walking, cycling and public transport as well as by car;
• personal safety and privacy; and
• energy efficiency, including solar orientation.
PS 1.12 Bushfire protection strategies are to be incorporated in all Rural Residential and clustered
rural settlement proposals. These are to be self contained within the property and to be
consistent with district and local fire strategies.
Settlement Servicing (Infrastructure)
PS 1.13 Infrastructure and servicing solutions to land use activities will adopt the principles of
ecological sustainability by—
• being sensitive to the existing natural and built character of the locality;
• reinforcing and promoting efficient, clustered and minimal-impact forms of development;
and
• promoting alternative forms of transport, especially links between settlements and the
coast.
PS 1.14 Plans for development that involve the expansion of existing townsites or the creation of new
settlements must be accompanied by a strategy incorporating the provision of services and
community infrastructure in a timely manner.
PS 1.15 Proponents of development must be able to demonstrate that the proposed level of access is
suitable to the location and function of the development, and that an appropriate range of
transport opportunities will be facilitated.
PS 1.16 Widening and straightening of Caves Road and local linkage roads may be supported only
where it can be demonstrated that there is an overriding safety issue that cannot be overcome
by other traffic management techniques.
PS 1.17 Development which necessitates servicing and infrastructure requirements may be supported
provided—
• remnant vegetation and fauna habitats are not threatened;
• water quality of the river systems is not degraded;
• visual character of the locality is maintained or enhanced;
• access, safety and land use conflict problems are not exacerbated;
• efficient energy usage is promoted;
• there is effective effluent disposal; and
• effective nutrient management.
4.2 Nature Conservation
Statement of Intent
The nature conservation values will be conserved through—
• reinforcing the functions of the Leeuwin-Naturaliste National Park;
• fostering strategic environmental corridors and preserving biological diversity;
• protecting and maintaining remnant vegetation;
• protecting water quality and quantities required to maintain ecosystem functions;
• supporting the establishment of a marine reserve; and
• establishing land use controls to conserve land and marine environments.
Policies
PS 2.1 This LNRSPP supports the consolidation of the Leeuwin-Naturaliste National Park.
PS 2.2 There is a general presumption against clearing of remnant vegetation.
PS 2.3 Clearing of remnant vegetation will require planning approval and may be supported
where—
• the need has been established for safety or for specific building requirements; or
• removal is for the establishment of horticulture or viticulture within areas defined as
Agricultural Protection under this LNRSPP; and
• removal of remnant vegetation does not threaten the presence of rare and threatened
flora, fauna and ecological communities.
PS 2.4 A landscape management plan will be required where the clearing of remnant vegetation for
installation of services is the only option.
PS 2.5 Local environmental corridors will be supported along roads, streams and wetlands, and
where they link existing blocks of remnant vegetation.
PS 2.6 Proposals for development adjacent to natural bushland areas will be required to include an
effective bushfire protection plan that is consistent with conservation values.
PS 2.7 Proponents of development must ensure that it does not significantly increase the threat of

bushfires nor is to be located in an area of high fire hazard.
PS 2.8 Proponents of development must ensure that it does not adversely affect the quality or
quantity of surface and groundwater resources where required for the conservation of natural
environmental values.
PS 2.9 Land use planning on the coast will have regard for the impacts of development on the
proposed marine reserve.
PS 2.10 Proposals for subdivision, development and land use within the designated Wetland Amenity
Areas will be assessed for their compatibility with wetland conservation.
4.3 Landscape
Statement of Intent
This is an extraordinary landscape which is part of the nation’s heritage. Its unique values will be
conserved by land use strategies and development assessment processes, having particular regard for—
• protection of the natural character of the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge, including the coastal and
marine interfaces and areas of remnant vegetation;
• maintenance of the mosaic of land uses evident in existing agricultural areas, while providing
for change in agricultural land uses; and
• recognition of the role and importance of human activity and its contribution to cultural
landscape.
Policies
PS 3.1 The Landscape Classes map (Figure 3) and the Landscape Character Units map (Figure 4)
form part of this LNRSPP.
PS 3.2 Development must be responsive to local values, and be compatible with the natural
characteristics and traditional settlement patterns of the area.
PS 3.3 Development will have due regard for the landscape integrity and value of Ridge backdrops
when viewed from the coastline, bays or Travel Route Corridors.
PS 3.4 In areas of Natural Landscape Significance, including where they are in Travel Route
Corridors, the significant natural characteristics will be protected and provide adequate
development setbacks. In these areas development will be screened from Travel Route
Corridors except public recreation or safety facilities which may be seen in the foreground.
PS 3.5 The environmental integrity and natural landscape values of the Western Coastal and
Eastern Slopes of the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge as identified in Figure 4 and near-shore
waters will be given high priority in land use decisions.
PS 3.6 In areas of Rural Landscape Significance, as identified in Figure 3, development or change of
use should protect the rural character of the land.
PS 3.7 In areas of General Character, as identified in Figure 3, development or change of use should
protect the rural character and conform with policies and guidelines for Travel Route
Corridors.
PS 3.8 Where the LNRSPP identifies development opportunities on the Ridge, such development
will—
• maintain the natural character where this exists;
• utilise sites of least visual impact;
• conform with a sustainable bushfire plan;
• maintain the values of adjacent conservation reserves;
• avoid the steeper and higher slopes; and
• avoid impacts on significant flora and fauna communities.

5198 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA [18 September 1998
CAPE
NATURALISTE
Eagle Bay
GEOGRAPHE BAY
DUNSBOROUGH
Yallingup BUSSELTON
LEGEND Vasse
Policy Area Boundary
Natural Landscape Significance
Rural Landscape Significance Cla C ira a u p l e t Carbunup River
Travel Route Corridor
Travel Route Corridors within Natural Landscape Significance
Travel Route Corridors within Rural Landscape Significance
General Character
Towns Metricup
Cowaramup
Gracetown
Cowaramup Point
INDIAN
OCEAN
MARGARET RIVER
Cape Mentelle
Prevelly
Witchcliffe
Cape Freycinet
Hamelin
Bay
Karridale
Kudardup
N Cape Hamelin
0 1 2 3 4 5
Kilometres
P B r u o n d b u u c r e y d O b ff y ic C e a , r M to in g i r s a tr p y h f ic o r S P e l c a t n io n n in , g AUGUSTA
Flinders
Bay
CAPE LEEUWIN SOUTHERN
OCEAN
Figure 3- Landscape Classes Map

18 September 1998] GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 5199
CAPE
NATURALISTE
GEOGRAPHE BAY
Cape Clairault
INDIAN
OCEAN
Cape Mentelle
Cape Freycinet
Hamelin
Bay
R
iver
Cape Hamelin
Flinders
Bay
CAPE LEEUWIN SOUTHERN
OCEAN
Black
Marga
River
w
doo
re
Eagle Bay
DUNSBOROUGH
Yallingup BUSSELTON
LEGEND Vasse
Policy Area Boundary
Eastern Line of the Ridge
Landscape Character Units Carbunup River
Western Coastal
Eastern Slopes
Plateau
Valleys
Coastal Plain
Coastal Wetlands Metricup
Scarp
Augusta Slopes
Geographe Slopes
Karri Sub-Unit
Cowaramup
Gracetown
Cowaramup Point
t
MARGARET RIVER
Prevelly
Witchcliffe
Karridale
Kudardup
N
0 1 2 3 4 5
Kilometres
P B r u o n d b u u c r e y d O b ff y ic C e a , r M to in g i r s a tr p y h f ic o r S P e l c a t n io n n in , g AUGUSTA
Figure 4- Landscape Character Units

4.4 Agriculture
Statement of Intent
The continued protection and viability of agricultural land within the policy area will be supported
by—
• protection for agricultural uses;
• protection from incompatible uses;
• encouraging environmentally and economically sustainable practices; and
• ensuring that tourism and settlement patterns retain a secondary and complementary function
on agricultural land.
Policies
Subdivision
PS 4.1 There is a general presumption against the subdivision of agricultural land for nonagricultural
purposes.
PS 4.2 Notwithstanding PS 4.1, subdivision of land designated as Agricultural Protection will be
considered under the following circumstances—
• where the proposed subdivision does not detract from the long-term viability of the land
for agricultural use; and
• where the proposed subdivision provides an opportunity to diversify or intensify the
agricultural use of the land.
Rural strata subdivision will be considered where it can be demonstrated the intent of strata
subdivision can be legally enforced in the event of the cessation of the strata.
PS 4.3 Subdivisions considered under PS 4.2 will comply with the following—
• where land is to be used for irrigated horticulture, confirmation of suitable soil capability
and water supply will be required. Subdivision should not be less than 20 hectares; or
• where land is to be used for viticulture and other intensive agricultural uses,
confirmation of suitable soil capability and water supply will be required. Subdivision
should not be less than 30 hectares; or
• for general agricultural uses including grazing, subdivision should not be less than 40
hectares and where land is proposed for agricultural consolidation, lots should be capable
of supporting a minimum of 750 Dry Sheep Equivalent (DSE). Areas of remnant
vegetation will not be included in the calculation of the DSE.
Non-agricultural Use/Development
PS 4.4 In order to support and protect agricultural land uses within land designated as Agricultural
Protection, there is a general presumption against the approval of non-agricultural
use/development. However, non-agricultural use/development will be considered where the
proponent can demonstrate that any approval will—
• be compatible with the agricultural use of adjoining or nearby land and where required,
include appropriate buffers within the subject land;
• maintain the long-term viability of the land for agricultural use;
• with respect to Enclave development, be subject to appropriate buffers to the surrounding
agricultural uses being established within the subject land;
• establish and enhance the role and function of the agricultural land as a component of
landscape significance; and
• be ancillary to agricultural production and complementary to the agricultural use.
PS 4.5 A second dwelling on land designated as Agricultural Protection will be considered as a
discretionary use, where it is demonstrated to be integral to and necessary for the efficient
undertaking of the agricultural activity.
4.5 Tourism
Statement of Intent
A diverse and sustainable tourism base which complements the existing character and lifestyle of the
policy area will be facilitated by—
• encouraging nature-based and cultural tourism opportunities;
• focusing coastal tourism in designated nodes;
• integrating large-scale tourist development into Principal Centres and other settlements;
• promoting low-scale tourist development that is consistent with local characteristics;
• encouraging innovative tourism development that responds to the local natural and cultural
environment;
• assessing land use proposals for their impact on tourism; and
• conserving those landscape, cultural and environmental values that offer future tourism

potential.
Policies
PS 5.1 Appropriate nature-based and cultural tourism and recreation proposals will be encouraged.
PS 5.2 Coastal Tourist Nodes will provide for a range of tourist accommodation options, including
campsites, hostels/backpacker accommodation, chalets, lodges and other low-impact tourist
development.
PS 5.3 Tourist development which is inappropriate in rural locations, will focus on or be adjacent to
existing Principal Centres. Where tourist development is proposed in other areas, the
proposal will comply with the Settlement Hierarchy, Policy Statements for the area and the
use category under the Land Use Strategy.
PS 5.4 Low-impact tourist development will be considered in rural locations where the
development—
• will not adversely affect the character of the surrounding area;
• comprises only buildings or structures which are small in scale and unobtrusive;
• is consistent with the transport and environmental policies of the LNRSPP; and
• in the case of an agricultural area, is incidental or complementary to the agricultural use.
PS 5.5 Infrastructure planning will consider the social and regional impacts of visitor use of local
recreation and social facilities.
PS 5.6 Tourism developments adjacent to the National Park or within the National Park Influence
Area (refer to Land Use Strategy) will be assessed for their direct and indirect impact on the
natural environmental values and management of the park.
PS 5.7 Tourist developments will be required to provide for recreation demands resulting from the
impact of the proposal, including the promotion of integrated tourism facilities, and visitor
and resident interaction, and an appropriate contribution towards monitoring and addressing
coastal and other off-site impacts of such development by independent agencies.
4.6 Cultural Heritage
Statement of Intent
Places of Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal cultural heritage significance will be identified and conserved
for the benefit of present and future generations by —
• establishment of the cultural heritage significance of the place;
• development and implementation of an appropriate conservation policy for the place;
• appropriate management of places in the public domain; and
• encouragement of the use of available incentives to heritage conservation.
Policies
PS 6.1 Consultation with the custodians of sites of Aboriginal cultural heritage significance will be
required at the structure planning stage of the planning process.
PS 6.2 As a component of proposals for the development of a place of recognised cultural heritage
significance, an appropriate heritage study will be carried out and, if considered necessary, a
conservation plan will be prepared in order to guide future development.
PS 6.3 Development or subdivision applications relating to places which are the subject of heritage
registration or heritage agreements must comply with the conditions of registration or
agreement.
4.7 Resources
Statement of Intent
Minerals and basic raw material resources will be—
• acknowledged in land use decisions;
• developed in a timely manner that has regard for development needs of settlements; and
• extracted where consistent with the cultural, environmental and economic values of the policy
area and giving due regard to the State significance of the resource.
Water resources will be allocated and managed in a way that balances and sustains environmental,
cultural and economic values.
Policies
Mineral Resources and Basic Raw Materials
PS 7.1 The timely exploration of land for mineral resources ahead of the creation of urban, tourism,
rural and conservation areas is encouraged.
PS 7.2 Exploration and development of mineral resources and basic raw materials will be subject to
environmental management controls and rehabilitation programs.

PS 7.3 Rehabilitation plans for mine sites and quarries to standards appropriate for the approved
end land use are required in advance of actual ground disturbance.
PS 7.4 Where mineral and basic raw material extraction is proposed the proponent will be required
to demonstrate—
• that the extraction is compatible with the statement of intent as set out above;
• that the need for the development outweighs its adverse impacts on the environment;
• that the impacts on landscape of siteworks and infrastructure will be minimised; and
• that a prompt restoration and “after-care” of the development site will be carried out.
Water Resources
PS 7.5 Creation of environmental buffers of native vegetation around rivers, streams, lakes and
wetlands is encouraged.
PS 7.6 The principles of “Integrated Catchment Management”, particularly nutrient management,
will be applied to development and land use applications where appropriate.
5 Land Use Strategy
The Land Use Strategy (“the Strategy”) comprises the—
• Land Use Strategy Plan (“the Strategy Plan” see Figure 5)
• Strategy description
• Policies
The Strategy identifies different categories of preferred land use throughout the policy area. The land
use categories relate to geographic locations and the policies are to be read in conjunction with the
Policy Statements (Section 4) for the entire policy area. Local-level plans and schemes will be guided
by all policies contained in this LNRSPP to help determine actual detailed land use.
The categories of land use making up the Strategy are described in the same order in which they
appear in the legend of the Strategy Plan—
• Settlement Hierarchy
• Existing Conservation Reserves
• Natural Landscape Amenity
• Agricultural Protection
• Primary Transport Network
5.1 Settlement Hierarchy
Strategy Description
The Settlement Hierarchy is summarised in Table 1.
The Strategy recognises the influence of settlements located outside the policy area. Specifically, the
Strategy accepts that Busselton townsite will continue to grow into the major city that will service the
Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge policy area. It is anticipated that Busselton townsite will accommodate a
population of 20,000-25,000 over the next 30 years, and eventually accommodate more than 50,000
people.
Design should be responsive to local characteristics and features. The LNRSPP therefore supports the
maintenance of existing centres’ character, which is best maintained by using the elements of
traditional urban form. Typically, traditional forms would include such principles as walkable
neighbourhoods, defined town centres, mixed use activities, interconnected street systems, shared and
visible public space, enhanced local character and environmental sustainability.
Principal Centre
Principal Centres of the settlement hierarchy are nominated as Dunsborough, Margaret River and
Augusta. Together with their respective “Development Investigation Areas” (shown on the Strategy
Plan), these Principal Centres will accommodate the major share of population growth in the policy
area.
Policies
LUS 1.1 Urban development is to conform with the Settlement Hierarchy set out in Table 1.
Principal Centre
LUS 1.2 Urban development at Dunsborough will be consolidated in accordance with the approved

town planning scheme, structure plans and the Shire of Busselton’s Dunsborough Town
Centre Plan.
LUS 1.3 Landscape buffers between the proposed Dunsborough light industrial area, adjoining uses
and the tourist drive to Commonage will be established.
LUS 1.4 Additional short-stay accommodation and tourist facilities will integrate with and enhance
the existing character of Dunsborough.
LUS 1.5 The village character and lifestyle value of the Margaret River townsite will be retained and
enhanced by adopting more innovative and sustainable design principles, in accordance with
the following guidelines—
• the use of small defined neighbourhoods with local parks and corner stores within
walking distance;
• maintaining and enhancing the character and sense of identity of the main street,
including providing for mixed uses and encouraging building design sympathetic to the
existing scale, colours and materials;
• establishing a ring road (particularly for heavy traffic); and
• using a comprehensive community participation process.
LUS 1.6 Augusta urban expansion will be accommodated where there are no detrimental impacts on
landscape quality of the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge, or the water quality of the Hardy Inlet
and where the other policies of the LNRSPP are complied with, including having regard to—
• recognised landscape quality of the area;
• values and management of the National Park;
• staging of the development;
• fire protection; and
• recognising the National Park Influence Area.
LUS 1.7 Land use diversity in and around Augusta will be retained by promoting a mix of tourism,
commercial, light industrial and innovative residential development opportunities that are
consistent with the protection of the unique natural and community values.

18 September 1998] GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 5203
CAPE
NATURALISTE
GEOGRAPHE BAY
Cape Clairault
INDIAN
OCEAN
Cape Mentelle
Cape Freycinet
Hamelin
Bay
R
iver
Cape Hamelin
Flinders
Bay
CAPE LEEUWIN SOUTHERN
OCEAN
Black
Marga
River
w
doo
re
Bunker Bay
Eagle Bay
DUNSBOROUGH
Yallingup BUSSELTON
Smiths Beach
LEGEND
Vasse
Policy Area Boundary
Settlement Hierarchy
Principal Centre Carbunup River
Village
Village with Enclaves
Hamlet
Hamlet with Enclaves A V a p s r s o e p o to s e D d u s n t s ra b t o e r g o i u c g r h o / a Y d a l l l i i n n k g u fr p om
Coastal Node (as an extension of the Busselton Bypass)
Tourist Node Metricup i o s f n s o p t e i c d i e fic n t s if t i u e d d i e p s e . nding completion
Development Investigation Area
Rural Residential
Existing Conservation Reserves
National Park
State Forest
Conservation Reserves (Existing and Proposed)
National Park (outside Policy Area) Cowaramup
Natural Landscape Amenity Gracetown
Cowaramup Point
Principal Ridge Protection Area
Ridge Landscape Amenity Area
National Park Influence Area
Regional Environmental Corridor
Wetland Amenity Area
Marine Management / Conservation
t
Agricultural Protection MARGARET RIVER
Principal Agriculture (Viticulture and Grazing) A proposed strategic road bypass
Principal Agriculture (Horticulture and Grazing) to the east of Margaret River is
Agriculture and Rural Landscape Prevelly n o o f t s p id e e c n if t i i c fi e s d tu p d e ie n s d . ing completion
Primary Transport Network
Existing Strategic Road Gnarabup
Proposed Strategic Road Witchcliffe
Walk, Cycling or Other Strategic Trails
Karridale
Hamelin Bay
Kudardup
N
0 1 2 3 4 5
Kilometres
Produced by Cartographic Section,
Bunbury Office, Ministry for Planning AUGUSTA
Figure 5- Land Use Strategy Plan

Table 1
Settlement Settlement Permanent Commercial Infrastructure Function
Type Population and (see also policies)
(unless Community
otherwise Services
stated)*
Principal Dunsborough, 2,000-20,000 District and Reticulated water, Highest order
Centre Margaret local sewerage and settlements
River, level. power. in the policy area.
Augusta
Village Vasse**, 500-2,000 Local level. Reticulated water, Cowaramup and
Cowaramup, sewerage and Witchcliffe also
Witchcliffe power. suitable
for Enclaves.
Hamlet Carbunup Less than 500 Convenience Innovative Function as rural
River, services and alternatives to service centre, focus
Metricup***, community conventional for rural living and
Kudardup, focus. reticulated water, tourist facilities.
Karridale sewerage and Kudardup and
power will be Karridale also suitable
considered for Enclaves.
Enclave Vicinity of Less than 50 Nil. Innovative on-site Enclaves may take the
Cowaramup, water supplies, form of clustered rural
Witchcliffe, effluent disposal living or specialised
Kudardup, and power on an developments and
Karridale individual site or may include low-
cooperation basis impact tourist
will be development.
considered.
With respect to
Karridale, an Enclave
may be developed at
“Old Karridale” and at
part Sussex Location
1362, part Sussex
Location 246 and part
Sussex Location 251.
Site selection will be
based on
demonstration
of compliance with
Enclave criteria as set
out in the LNRSPP
Policy Report.
Coastal Eagle Bay, Up to 500 Local/ Reticulated water, Principal function is
Node Yallingup, convenience sewerage and composite
Gracetown, and power tourist/holiday
Prevelly, tourist unless proponents accommodation and
Gnarabup facilities can general residential
and demonstrate use.
community suitable
focus. alternative Expansion of nodes
technologies will be limited to areas
that achieve identified on the Land
standards Use Strategy Plan,
approved by the subject to
responsible demonstration
authorities. of suitability.

Tourist Bunker Bay, Short-stay Convenience Reticulated water, Principal function is
Node Caves House, accommodation and sewerage and tourist/holiday
Hamelin Bay for less than tourist power accommodation.
500 facilities. unless proponent Permanent residential
can demonstrate use will generally not
suitable be permitted.
alternative
technologies
that achieve
standards
approved by the
responsible
authorities.
Smiths Beach Short-stay and Local Reticulated water, At Smiths Beach, the
(west of permanent convenience sewerage and function is determined
Smiths Beach populations to services, power unless by policy PS 1.3 (as
Road only). be determined tourist proponent can amended).
in accordance facilities and demonstrate
with policy PS community suitable
1.3 (as focus. alternative
amended), technologies
policy LUS that achieve
1.21 (as standards
amended) and approved by the
other relevant responsible
provisions. authorities.

Other settlements
Lower-order settlements are shown on the Strategy Plan and are described in Table 1. Individual
descriptions are not provided here, however specific policies are included below. Specific reference is
made with respect to the Hamelin Bay area where Enclaves have some potential given its history as a
settlement, proximity to the coast (but being east of the Ridge), marginal agricultural value of the
land, requests for greater coastal access and settlement south of Prevelly, and giving due weight to
planning proposals that are well advanced through formal planning processes or directly affected by
past appeal decisions.
Accordingly, “New” Karridale (i.e. Bussell Highway crossroads) is suited to be established as a Hamlet
with Enclaves. It is acknowledged that nominated Enclaves at Karridale would be further away from
the Hamlet than the normal criteria for Enclaves under the Settlement Strategy. The location of the
Enclaves near “Old” Karridale are nominated in the Settlement Hierarchy Table to recognise the
merits and special circumstances of those particular sites, but to avoid ad hoc proposals for Enclaves
that would conflict with the wider Agriculture and Rural Landscape area.
Policies
Village
LUS 1.8 Growth of the Village centres of Witchcliffe, Cowaramup and Vasse will require further
investigations in order to determine a settlement size commensurate with their Village
function.
Village with Enclaves
LUS 1.9 Enclaves must be compatible with and not compromise the primacy of agriculture.
LUS 1.10 Particular attention will be paid to the issue of titanium mineralisation to the east of
Witchcliffe town and to retention of existing character, including historic buildings and
native vegetation.
Hamlet
LUS 1.11 Hamlet development at Carbunup River will provide a rural service centre for the nearby
intensive agricultural industry but the form and size of urban development must remain
separated from and not compromise the primacy of the horticultural industry.
LUS 1.12 Ecological communities on Carbunup Reserve 38582 will be protected.
LUS 1.13 Future Hamlet development at Metricup will be staged having regard to resolving the
recognised mineral resource in the locality.
Hamlet with Enclaves
LUS 1.14 Karridale is designated as a Hamlet with Enclaves. Nominated Enclaves further away from
the Hamlet than the normal criteria for Enclaves under the Settlement Strategy may be
permitted in accordance with Table 1 (Settlement Hierarchy).
LUS 1.15 The status of Kudardup as a Hamlet with Enclaves will be further investigated, including
discussions with the local community, with a view to upgrading this settlement to Village
with Enclaves.
Coastal Node
LUS 1.16 Limited expansion of the Eagle Bay Coastal Node will accord with the Eagle Bay Precinct of
the Meelup-Bunker Bay Structure Plan (1993).
LUS 1.17 Expansion of Yallingup or Gracetown will be considered provided it conserves the
surrounding conservation and landscape values.
LUS 1.18 Further development at Prevelly and Gnarabup will be in accordance with the designated
areas in the gazetted town planning schemes and approved structure plans.
Tourist Node
LUS 1.19 Development of Bunker Bay as a Tourist Node will be confined to the existing zoned area,
with the remainder of the land managed for its landscape amenity value.
LUS 1.20 Tourism development at Smiths Beach and Caves House must include an environmentally
acceptable means of effluent disposal and a reticulated water supply, conservation of the
Principal Ridge Protection Area and values within the Ridge Landscape Amenity Area,
acceptable bushfire protection and landscape management strategies.
LUS 1.21 Proposed development at Smiths Beach will reinforce the primary tourism function of the
site and not compromise the landscape values of the area. The size, nature and location of any development in the

development investigation areas at Smiths Beach must be determined having regard to the overriding need to protect
the visual amenity and environmental values of the area.
LUS 1.22 Development of Hamelin Bay Tourist Node will be low-impact tourist development
compatible with the surrounding National Park and may include uses such as camping
facilities, local service centre for convenience goods, backpackers’ hostel or lodge, chalets, and
a cafe.
Development Investigation Area
The Strategy includes several Development Investigation Areas which are a guide to potential
development but require detailed investigation prior to subdivision and development, including form,
function and design. In the vicinity of Principal Centres, these may comprise urban development but
other sites designated Development Investigation Area will need to conform with policies relevant to
their particular location.
Policies
LUS 1.23 Proposals for rezoning, subdivision and development within the Development Investigation
Area will be considered only after comprehensive planning has been undertaken and a
resultant Outline Development Plan /Development Guide Plan which complies with the requirements of PS 3.8 has
been the subject of community consultation, including public advertising, and approved by the local government
and the Western Australian Planning Commission having consulted with the relevant agencies..
Rural Residential
The main areas of existing or committed Rural Residential development are shown in the Strategy
Plan. These areas contain stands of significant remnant vegetation which are an important
contributor to the landscape mosaic of the region. Rural Residential development must recognise this
landscape significance and not compromise its character. Parts of these areas also contain potentially
productive agricultural land.
It is a general policy of the LNRSPP that new areas of Rural Residential subdivision will not be
supported, therefore the Strategy does not designate new areas for such uses. Where possible, infill
development within areas designated Rural Residential should adopt cluster principles that are more
responsive to retaining landscape values and allowing some agricultural pursuits.
Clustered forms of development in designated Enclaves may be permitted, but there is a general
presumption against further Rural Residential subdivision and development throughout most of the
policy area. In particular, closer settlement will not be supported in productive and potentially
productive agricultural areas, conservation areas, around wetlands, in important landscapes, and in
locations near designated settlements which would conflict with future urban development.
Towns of Eagle Bay, Dunsborough, Margaret River and Augusta have limited surrounding areas
designated for Rural Residential. Two other significant areas, known as Ridgelands and Commonage,
have been created to confine further Rural Residential development throughout the policy area.
Policies
LUS 1.24 Rural Residential will be restricted to the areas shown in the Land Use Strategy Plan.
LUS 1.25 Subdivision and development design that facilitates better use of land already committed for
Rural Residential development will be encouraged. Assessment of proposals will address the
following criteria—
• provision for clustered settlement;
• provision of community-based activities and services;
• provision for walking, cycling and possible future public transport;
• opportunities for local enterprise development such as limited small-scale tourism
development, including accommodation, attractions and cottage industries; and
• suitability for small-scale intensive agriculture.
LUS 1.26 Consolidation and diversification of existing Rural Residential land to the west of Margaret
River, will be compatible with Regional Environmental Corridor functions and landscape
values.
LUS 1.27 Development on the slopes of the Boodjidup Valley that is inconsistent with local landscape
character must not be seen from transport routes.
LUS 1.28 The consolidation of existing and committed Rural Residential land use surrounding
Augusta will be permitted where there is no detrimental impact on the Leeuwin-Naturaliste
National Park.
5.2 Existing Conservation Reserves

Strategy Description
The Strategy Plan designates areas of existing Crown land as various categories of Conservation
Reserves. They include National Park, State Forest and Conservation Reserves.
National Park
Policies
LUS 2.1 The Leeuwin-Naturaliste National Park is central to conserving the core values of the
Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge and the conservation and consolidation of the park, where
possible, is supported by the LNRSPP.
LUS 2.2 Future access to the coast will be provided by spur roads only.
State Forest
Policies
LUS 2.3 Proposals for development surrounding State Forest must demonstrate that the development
meets fire hazard and risk standards associated with this category of Conservation Reserves.
LUS 2.4 Development does not adversely affect the fire management regimes of adjacent landowners.
Conservation Reserves (Existing and Proposed)
Policies
LUS 2.5 Maintaining or enhancing the conservation and landscape values within existing and
proposed Conservation Reserves will be the primary determinant in decision-making on
proposals for land use, subdivision or development within these areas.
LUS 2.6 Proposals for development surrounding Existing and Proposed Conservation Reserves will
demonstrate that the development meets fire hazard and risk standards associated with this
category of Conservation Reserves.
LUS 2.7 Development will not adversely affect the fire management regimes of adjacent landowners.
LUS 2.8 Conserving nature-based recreation opportunities along the Margaret River and within the
Bramley Block will be encouraged.
5.3 Natural Landscape Amenity
Strategy Description
The Strategy includes five categories of land use and a Marine Management/Conservation category
that are intended to conserve and enhance the special natural landscape amenity.
Principal Ridge Protection Area
Policies
LUS 3.1 In Principal Ridge Protection Areas, protection of conservation and landscape values will be
paramount. Only land uses compatible with these values will be permitted.
LUS 3.2 Land in Principal Ridge Protection Areas can be held in either private or public ownership.
LUS 3.3 In the Principal Ridge Protection Areas, there is a general presumption against further
subdivision. Development will normally be restricted to one dwelling per lot and low-impact
recreation facilities in limited locations, if considered compatible with conserving the
ecological and landscape values and able to address bushfire protection requirements of the
Ridge and National Park.
LUS 3.4 As an incentive for landowners in Principal Ridge Protection Areas electing to retain the land
in private ownership (as set out in guidelines in the LNRSPP Policy Report), arrangements
for maintaining the conservation and landscape values of the land in perpetuity, are as
follows—
• for a lot in existence at the date of Gazettal of this LNRSPP, subdivision of one
additional lot—in clustered form (unless based on existing dwellings); or
• low-impact tourist development;
both subject to—
• no detrimental impacts on existing remnant vegetation other than for the approved
development envelope and services;
• conforming with other policies under this LNRSPP, particularly those relating to fire
management;
• the owner entering into an agreement for—
- continued management of the land to guarantee the maintenance of conservation and
landscape values in perpetuity; and
- an absolute caveat on the title of the lot to secure performance of the agreement in
perpetuity.
LUS 3.5 There is a general presumption against the clearing of remnant vegetation in the Principal
Ridge Protection Area other than for approved building envelopes, access and services.

Ridge Landscape Amenity Area
Policies
LUS 3.6 Maintaining or enhancing the conservation and landscape values of the Ridge Landscape
Amenity Area will be the primary criteria against which proposals for land use, subdivision
or development within these areas will be assessed.
LUS 3.7 In the Ridge Landscape Amenity Areas, there is a general presumption against further
subdivision. Development will normally be restricted to one dwelling per lot and low-impact
recreation facilities in limited locations, if considered compatible with conserving the
ecological and landscape values of the Ridge, National Park and Principal Ridge Protection
Areas.
LUS 3.8 As an incentive for landowners to maintain the conservation and landscape values of the
land in perpetuity, the following will be considered—
• for lots 40 ha and above, subdivision based on a ratio of one lot per 20 ha. Subdivision
should be in clustered form—unless based on existing dwellings; or
• for lots below 40 ha at the date of Gazettal of this LNRSPP, subdivision of one
additional lot; or
• low-impact tourist development;
subject to—
• no detrimental impacts on existing remnant vegetation other than for the approved
development envelope and services;
• conforming with other policies under this LNRSPP, particularly those relating to fire
management;
• the owner entering into an agreement for —
- rehabilitation of the land or retention of vegetation other than for the approved
development envelope and services;
- continued management of the land to guarantee the maintenance of conservation
and landscape values in perpetuity; and
- an absolute caveat on the title of the lot to secure performance of the agreement in
perpetuity.
LUS 3.9 Proposals for development adjoining the National Park or Principal Ridge Protection Area
must demonstrate that the development meets fire hazard and risk standards associated
with this category and that it does not adversely affect the fire management regimes of
adjacent landowners.
LUS 3.10 There is a general presumption against the clearing of remnant vegetation in the Ridge
Landscape Amenity Area other than for approved building envelopes, access and services.
LUS 3.11 Subdivision or developments between Cape Naturaliste and Meelup Regional Park will be
consistent with the Ridge Landscape Amenity designation and will provide for increased
public access along and to the coast.
LUS 3.12 Development will comply with the protection and enhancement of the environmental
integrity of ecological linkages and their landscape qualities.
LUS 3.13 Establishment of indigenous vegetation that complements the values of Regional
Environmental Corridors will be supported.
LUS 3.14 In meeting its statutory obligations, CALM, as managers of the National Park, should
comply with the “good neighbour zone” and recognise private use of the adjoining land and
adjust management strategies as appropriate, particularly its fire management program,
control of vermin, or the location of access roads or visitor facilities that could intrude upon
the privacy of the neighbouring owners.
LUS 3.15 Landowners adjoining the National Park or Principal Ridge Protection Area should comply
with the “good neighbour zone” and recognise potential impacts upon the values and
management of the National Park and Principal Ridge Protection Areas, particularly in
relation to fire management and control of vermin.
LUS 3.16 For land adjoining the National Park or Principal Ridge Protection Area, local government
should consider inclusion within its local planning scheme of special provisions for control of
stock, domestic animals, weeds, and special provisions for the type, scale and materials of
buildings.
National Park Influence Area
Policies
LUS 3.17 Within the National Park Influence Area—
• The underlying land use designation from the Land Use Strategy applies.
• Land uses will be compatible with the conservation and landscape values of the Ridge.

• Remnant vegetation should be retained where possible, other than for approved
building envelopes, access and services.
• In meeting its statutory obligations, CALM, as managers of the National Park, should
comply with the “good neighbour zone” and recognise private use of the adjoining land
and adjust management strategies as appropriate, particularly its fire management
program, control of vermin, or the location of access roads or visitor facilities that could
intrude upon the privacy of the neighbouring owners.
• Landowners adjoining the National Park or Principal Ridge Protection Area should
comply with the “good neighbour zone” and recognise potential impacts upon the values
and management of the National Park and Principal Ridge Protection Areas,
particularly in relation to fire management and control of vermin.
• Proposals for development on land adjoining the National Park or Principal Ridge
Protection Area must demonstrate that the development meets fire hazard and risk
standards associated with this category and that the development does not adversely
affect the fire management regimes of the National Park.
• For land adjoining the National Park or Principal Ridge Protection Area, local
government should consider inclusion within its local planning scheme of special
provisions for control of stock, domestic animals, weeds, and special provisions for the
type, scale and materials of buildings.
Regional Environmental Corridor
Policies
LUS 3.18 Within the designated Regional Environmental Corridors, the integrity of their nature
conservation, landscape, cultural heritage, scientific and potential recreational values will be
given the highest priority in land use decisions.
LUS 3.19 Subdivision, development and land use proposals will be assessed for their compatibility
with the Regional Environmental Corridor function.
LUS 3.20 There is a general presumption against the clearing of remnant vegetation in Regional
Environmental Corridors.
LUS 3.21 Establishment of indigenous vegetation that complements the values of Regional
Environmental Corridors will be supported.
LUS 3.22 All development will ensure the protection and enhancement of the environmental integrity
of ecological linkages and their landscape qualities.
LUS 3.23 Low-impact recreation and tourist development opportunities, based on natural attractions
(such as along Quindalup-Vasse Wetlands, Margaret River, Boranup Forest block and Hardy
Inlet), will be considered providing they are consistent with preserving the natural values of
the Land Use Strategy category.
LUS 3.24 Proposals for development must demonstrate that the development meets fire hazard and
risk standards associated with this category of land use and that the development does not
adversely affect the fire management regimes of adjacent landowners.
LUS 3.25 Rural Residential development to the north of the Margaret River between the townsite and
the Ridge will be compatible with Regional Environmental Corridor functions and landscape
values.
LUS 3.26 Expansion of Margaret River townsite must ensure that the landscape quality of the
Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge and water quality of the Margaret River are enhanced.
LUS 3.27 Expansion of the Augusta townsite must ensure that the landscape quality of the Leeuwin-
Naturaliste Ridge and water quality of the Hardy Inlet are maintained or enhanced.
Wetland Amenity Area
Policies
LUS 3.28 Proposals for subdivision, development and land use within the designated Wetland Amenity
Areas will be assessed for their compatibility with wetland conservation.
LUS 3.29 Development near the coast will conform with Department of Transport and Ministry for
Planning guidelines as reflected in the proposed Shire of Busselton District Planning
Scheme.
LUS 3.30 Rural landscape and coastal reserve buffers between Abbey and Vasse, and Dunsborough
and Abbey will be maintained to avoid urban sprawl and to create distinct communities.
LUS 3.31 Subdivision and development will be consistent with and complement the existing landscape
character of the Quindalup Strip and “Old Dunsborough”.
LUS 3.32 The environmental and recreation values of the Wetland Amenity Area will be protected
while facilitating tourism development that responds to the natural and social values of the
locality.

LUS 3.33 The landscape separation of Abbey, Vasse and Dunsborough will be maintained.
Marine Management/Conservation
Policies
LUS 3.34 The establishment of a marine reserve as consistent with the report A Representative Marine
Reserve System for Western Australia: Report of the Marine Parks and Reserves Selection
Working Group (1994) within the policy area will be supported by the LNRSPP.
LUS 3.35 Development will be designed to minimise adverse impacts on marine management and
conservation.
LUS 3.36 Development of recreation facilities and public amenities on adjacent land will have regard to
the surrounding landscape and conservation values.
5.4 Agricultural Protection
Strategy Description
The Strategy Plan designates three categories of agricultural land use to enhance and develop
agriculture in the policy area for its economic, social and landscape values. The categories are
Principal Agriculture (Viticulture and Grazing), Principal Agriculture (Horticulture and Grazing) and
Agriculture and Rural Landscape.
Principal Agriculture in the policy area comprises—
• “Prime Land” which is derived from a combination of Viticulture—Class I and Irrigated
Horticulture—Category 1, and includes areas of Grazing Class I.
• “Prime Land with Minor Limitations” which is derived from Viticulture—Class II and
Horticulture—Class II, and includes areas of Grazing Class I.
Classifications have been based upon Tille and Lantzke (1990).
Land in the Agriculture and Rural Landscape category comprises less Prime Agricultural Land than
the Principal Agriculture categories but is recognised by the Strategy for its important contribution to
the economic, social and environmental values of the policy area.
Principal Agriculture (Viticulture and Grazing)
Policies
LUS 4.1 In areas designated Principal Agriculture (Viticulture and Grazing), the predominant use of
land will be agriculture. Other uses, including uses of interspersed lands with lesser
agricultural potential, will be compatible with and not jeopardise, agricultural use of
adjoining Prime Agricultural Land.
LUS 4.2 Agriculture (including viticulture) is to remain the predominant economic land use, within
the constraints of protecting remnant vegetation and landscape values.
LUS 4.3 Subdivision of agricultural land other than for agricultural purposes will generally not be
permitted.
LUS 4.4 Conserving the landscape values and natural patterns of drainage and vegetation of the
Yelverton Scarp will be the principal criterion against which proposals for subdivision and
development will be assessed.
LUS 4.5 Development on the slopes of the Boodjidup Valley and the eastern face of the Yelverton
Scarp that is inconsistent with local landscape character must not be seen from transport
routes or from the lowlands to the east.
Principal Agriculture (Horticulture and Grazing)
Policies
LUS 4.6 In areas designated Principal Agriculture (Horticulture and Grazing), the predominant use
of land will be agriculture. Other uses, including uses of interspersed lands with lesser
agricultural potential, will be compatible with and not jeopardise, agricultural use of
adjoining prime land.
LUS 4.7 Agriculture (including horticulture and grazing) is to remain the predominant economic land
use, within the constraints of protecting remnant vegetation and landscape values.
LUS 4.8 Subdivision of agricultural land other than for agricultural purposes will generally not be
permitted.
LUS 4.9 The potential for expansion of rural/horticultural uses and increases in the function of rural
processing and cottage-based industries will be promoted by the establishment of—
• rural processing activities;
• cottage industry;
• rural associated tourist activities; and
• recreation/tourist attractions in proximity to settlement nodes or where there is no
detrimental impact on the area’s horticultural potential.

Agriculture and Rural Landscape
Policies
LUS 4.10 In areas designated Agriculture and Rural Landscape, conserving productive agricultural
potential and rural landscape values will be the principal criterion used in assessing
subdivision applications and proposed changes of land use, to ensure these values continue to
predominate.
LUS 4.11 Development of a mix of rural and recreational opportunities, especially where related to
ecotourism activities, will be encouraged.
LUS 4.12 Proposals for development will demonstrate that the development meets appropriate fire
hazard and risk standards, and that the development does not adversely affect the fire
management regimes of adjacent landowners.
LUS 4.13 Subdivision or developments between Cape Naturaliste and Meelup Regional Park will be
consistent with the Ridge Landscape Amenity Area designation and will provide for
increased public access along and to the coast.
LUS 4.14 Opportunities for appropriate tourist facilities on low capability agricultural land within the
Dunsborough-Vasse area and consistent with the Agriculture and Rural Landscape
objectives in the Land Use Strategy will be facilitated.
5.5 Primary Transport Network
Strategy Description
The Primary Transport Network is made up of strategically important roads plus walk, cycle and other
strategic trails that provide alternatives to motorised transport.
Existing Strategic Road
Policies
LUS 5.1 Bussell Highway will remain the principal north-south road transport route. Caves Road will
be retained as a tourist service road with additional demands being accommodated through
strategic east-west linkages.
LUS 5.2 Development and intensification of land use that will affect the views from Caves Road and
Cape Naturaliste Road will not be supported.
Proposed Strategic Road
Policies
LUS 5.3 Development and intensification of land use that will affect the views from the proposed
Ridgelands scenic link road and the lighthouse will not be supported.
Walk, Cycling or Other Strategic Trails
Policies
LUS 5.4 A high priority will be given to the progressive development of the four designated strategic
trails in the planning of settlements, tourism and recreation facilities and the coordination of
infrastructure.
Appendix 1—Glossary of Terms
Basic Raw Materials
Basic Raw Materials include sand, gravel, clay, hard rock, limestone and gravel and other construction
material (DPUD, 1992).
Cape to Cape Walk Trail
Recreational walk trail that runs 120km nominal distance from Cape Leeuwin to Cape Naturaliste.
The track traverses a variety of environments within the Leeuwin-Naturaliste National Park,
predominantly running along the coast across sandy beaches, pebbly beaches, along cliff tops, and
through coastal scrub. It deviates from the coast at Boranup, Moses Rock and around the cliffs at
Wilyabrup to take the walker through a variety of natural landscapes and experiences.
Clustered Rural Residential Development
A new form of Rural Residential subdivision and development, which encourages a clustering or
grouping of dwellings into Enclaves, surrounded by larger lots, sometimes managed as common
property. This approach has been adapted in an Australian context by Cuming and Francis (1996) and
offers an alternative approach to traditional dispersed Rural Residential subdivision that is more
efficient in use of rural land resources and has a design and focus more responsive to the natural
environment.

Clustered Rural Residential subdivisions may offer rural living with a common interest which may
focus, for example, on an agricultural pursuit, conserving a conservation feature or permaculture
farming. Enclaves should be within easy walking or cycling distance of Hamlets or Villages for
provision of community facilities. Although there may be linkages between clusters, they should be
discrete, identifiable Enclaves separated by rural or conservation uses.
Compatible Uses
Uses that are compatible with the priority use.
Conservation
The protection, maintenance, management, sustainable use, restoration and enhancement of the
natural environment (ANZECC, 1993).
Conservation Covenant
An agreement between a landowner and a government authority which seeks to protect and enhance
the natural, cultural and/or scientific values of the land. The terms of the covenant are discussed
between the owner and a specified government agency and once agreement is reached, it is advertised
and submitted to the Minister for the Environment for approval. The covenant is then registered on
the certificate of title and binds all future owners. Most covenants are designed to be permanent
although they can, if desired, be specified for a particular period and may also be extinguished under
some circumstances.
Cottage Industry
A business, professional service, trade or light industry producing arts and craft goods which cannot be
carried out under the provisions relating to a home occupation and which, in the opinion of the
Council—
• does not cause injury to or prejudicially affect the amenity of the neighbourhood;
• where operated in a Residential zone, does not entail the employment of any person other than a
member of the occupier’s household;
• is conducted in an out-building which is compatible within the principal uses to which land in the
zone in which it is located may be put;
• does not occupy an area in excess of 50m2;
• does not display a sign exceeding 0.2m2 in area.
Cultural Heritage
Evidence of the past. Some aspects of cultural heritage are considered to be significant—things that we
want to keep for future generations to enjoy.
Development
Any change to land use, including housing, any demolition, erection, construction, alteration of or
addition to any building or structure on the land and any excavation or other works.
Development Hierarchy
See Settlement Hierarchy (Table 1).
Dry Sheep Equivalent (DSE)
A term used to measure the capability of land to support stock, that is, the energy yield. The basic unit
of measure is the merino wether.
Ecologically Significant Areas
Areas that are considered to have ecological value whether flora and fauna, remnant vegetation,
ecological corridor, water or any other ecological feature.
Ecologically Sustainable Development
Using, conserving and enhancing the community resources so that ecological processes, on which life
depends, are maintained and the total quality of life, now and in the future, can be increased
(Ecologically Sustainable Development Working Groups, 1991).
Ecotourism
Identified in the National Ecotourism Strategy (1994) as—
• nature-based tourism that involves education and interpretation of the natural environment and

is managed to be ecologically sustainable.
The South-West Regional Tourism Strategy further classifies ecotourism as having five fundamental
principles: related tourism activity must be sustainable, educative, conservation-supporting, locally
beneficial and generating tourist satisfaction.
Environment
The social and physical surroundings in which all living organisms, or group of organisms, live.
Extractive Industry
An industry which involves the—
• extraction of basic raw materials;
• management of products from any basic raw materials where the manufacture is carried out on
the land from which any of the materials so used is extracted or on land adjacent thereto; and
• storage of such materials or products.
Integrated Catchment Management
The planning and management of our natural resources on a river, groundwater, or catchment basis
with the aim of achieving sustainable use of those resources so that social and economic development
do not affect the long-term future of the resources.
Intensive Agriculture/Horticulture
The use of land (and/or water) for the purposes of trade, commercial reward or gain, including such
buildings and earthworks normally associated with the following—
• The production of grapes, vegetables, flowers, exotic and native plants, fruit and nuts.
• The establishment and operation of plant and fruit nurseries.
• The development of land for irrigated fodder production and irrigated pasture (including tree
farms).
• The development of land for the keeping, rearing or fattening of pigs, poultry (for either egg or
meat production), rabbits (for either meat or fur production), and other livestock in feedlots.
• Dairy milking sheds.
• The development of land for the keeping, rearing or fattening of other livestock above those
stocking rates recommended by Agriculture WA in consultation with surrounding farmers for the
applicable pasture type.
• Aquaculture.
Land
Includes land, tenements and hereditaments and any interest therein, and also houses, buildings, and
other works and structures (Town Planning and Development Act, 1928 (as amended)).
Land Capability
The ability of land to accept a type and intensity of use permanently, or for specified periods under
specific management, without permanent damage. It will be based on an assessment of biophysical
land resources information as currently available. (Houghton et al, 1986)
NOTE: An area of land may be capable of sustaining various uses but some uses may be more suitable
than others for reasons other than land management. Refer to Land Suitability.
Landscape Character
Where there is an apparent harmony or unity among all the natural elements of a landscape,
including the landlords, geology and vegetation. Each area has its own distinguishing landscape
character, and each invokes a distinct response (Simonds, 1961). The Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge
Landscape Character Units are shown in Figure 4.
Landscape Classes
The mosaic of landscape values, mapped during the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Landscape Assessment Study
(1997) has been simplified by classifying the values according to the classes listed below and shown in
Figure 3.
(a) Natural Landscape Significance
Areas in this class include all the natural characteristics which contribute to significant
natural landscapes.
(b) Rural Landscape Significance
Areas in this class include all the natural and cultural characteristics which contribute to
significant rural landscapes.

(c) Travel Route Corridor
Key areas which allow people opportunities to access and experience adjoining areas and
consist of a 600 metre wide corridor (300m on either side) along the Primary Transport
Network. These corridors may or may not include areas where rural or natural significance
have been identified.
(d) General Character
Areas that have not been classified as any of the above classes fall into General Character. They
provide the backdrop to significant landscapes and travel route corridor areas. The landscape
character units, as defined in Figure 4, prevail over these areas and character of these units is
to be maintained.
For further details, readers are referred to Leeuwin-Naturaliste Landscape Assessment Study (1997).
Landscape Management Strategy
A Landscape Management Strategy was prepared as part of the landscape assessment to provide the
broad-scale planning context for managing landscape values.
Landscape Significance
Based on the assessment of aesthetic, social or historic features under the categories of natural and
rural areas. Criteria used to define areas that contain significant landscapes are provided in the
landscape assessment (see Leeuwin-Naturaliste Landscape Assessment Study (1997)). For
convenience, types of landscape significance have been grouped into Landscape Classes as shown in
Figure 3.
Landscape Values
Features within the landscape that are highly valued, as defined by documented research. A more
detailed description of landscape values in the Leeuwin-Naturaliste is provided in the supporting
Leeuwin-Naturaliste Landscape Assessment Study (1997).
Land Suitability
The potential uses of the land based upon the consideration of physical, technical, social and economic
factors. Full suitability evaluation involves a multi-disciplinary approach to land evaluation
(Houghton et al, 1986). Also refer to Land Capability.
Land Use Strategy
The preferred predominant land uses across the area covered by the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge
Statement of Planning Policy. Comprises a Land Use Strategy Plan, accompanying descriptive text,
policies and implementation.
Low-Impact Development
Means the use and development of land in such a manner that does not detract from the rural and
natural amenity of the locality, and includes the following criteria—
(i) development being located so as to avoid ridge lines, escarpments or visually exposed sites and
situated where screening vegetation or land form can be utilised;
(ii) use and development being sensitively located and designed to minimise impact on vegetation,
water courses, soil quality and existing land uses;
(iii) development being of a scale and nature so as to be self-sustaining on the lot, or demonstrating
the ability to provide servicing without significant modifications to existing infrastructure;
(iv) development that by the nature of its scale, design, colours, materials, landscaping and use, has
minimal impact on its site and surrounding areas; and
(v) where the land use and any development has a minimal off-site consequence.
Low-Impact Recreation Facilities
Are facilities of a predominantly recreational or ancillary nature, excluding commercial
accommodation, which meet the criteria of “Low-impact Development”. Examples include parking
areas, public toilets, walk trails, picnic sites and board walks.
Low-Impact Tourist Development
Is development of a predominantly tourist nature which meets the criteria of “Low-impact
Development”.
Marine Park
Marine areas of special attraction reserved and managed for public recreation as well as conservation

(CALM).
Marine Reserve
Representative areas of the State’s marine flora and fauna that have special biological or geological
significance. Areas may also be chosen for their scenic quality and their importance in the protection of
particular species (CALM).
Mineralisation
Where a volume of rock or sediment (shown as an area in plan form) contains minerals which are
present in such amounts that a valuable or potentially valuable deposit results. With adequate
exploration mineralisation may prove to be economically mineable at present. Alternatively, mining
might not be economic at present, but with technological advances or with increasing market demand,
presently uneconomic mineralisation might become economic in the future.
Municipal Inventory
A list of places which, in the opinion of the local government are, or may become, of cultural heritage
significance. Local councils are required under Section 45 of the Heritage of Western Australia Act,
1990 to prepare such a list.
Policy Area
The policy area has been defined by the inner border of the boundary shown in Figure 1. It extends
from the near-shore waters of Cape Naturaliste in the north to Cape Leeuwin in the south and the
waters east of the Capes to the eastern boundary of the policy area. The Bussell Highway and the
eastern extent of townsites found along the Highway form the eastern boundary.
Policy Statements
General policies that apply throughout the policy area. Topics include settlement, nature conservation,
landscape, agriculture, tourism, cultural heritage and resources. The Policy Statements derive from
the Vision and Overall Objectives and should be read in conjunction with the Land Use Strategy.
Prime Agricultural Land
Land that is identified as being within Class I or II for the purposes of market gardening, orchards or
viticulture (defined as intensive agriculture/horticulture) within the Busselton, Margaret River,
Augusta Land Capability Study (1990) prepared for the Department of Agriculture.
Land identified as being within Class I for the purposes of grazing may also be deemed to be Prime
Agricultural Land (and subject to restrictions applying thereto) following specific site assessment and
by decision of local government. Land containing remnant vegetation or subject to other
environmental or biological influences that render its use for agriculture undesirable is deemed not to
be Prime Agricultural Land.
Private Recreation
Land used for parks, gardens, playgrounds, sports arenas or other grounds for recreation which are not
usually open to the public without charge.
Public Recreation
Land used for a public park, public gardens, foreshore reserve, playground or other grounds for
recreation which are usually open to the public without charge.
Rails to Trails
Promotes and supports the establishment of a wide network of paths and linear nature reserves along
closed railway lines.
Remnant Vegetation
Stands of indigenous vegetation. Located throughout the policy area along roadside corridors, on
private land and throughout many Crown Reserves, including the Leeuwin-Naturaliste National
Park.
Reserve
The term Reserve may be used in two distinct ways—
1. Land classified in town planning schemes for public purposes (WAPC, 1996).
2. Areas of Crown land reserved for public purposes as determined by the Land Act, 1933 and the
Land Administration Act, 1997.

Rural Industry
An industry handling, treating, processing or packing primary products grown, reared or produced in
the locality, and a workshop servicing plant or equipment used for rural purposes in the locality.
Rural Residential
A category of land use under the Land Use Strategy that provides an alternative residential lifestyle in
a rural setting. Normally, Rural Residential subdivisions occur within Special Rural zones under the
special provisions of a local government town planning scheme that seek to preserve the amenity of
such areas and control land use impacts.
Rural Residential subdivisions comprise lot sizes ranging from one to 10 hectares, with two to three
hectares being most common. The theme and purpose of Rural Residential subdivisions vary from
bush blocks to hobby farms and small-scale intensive agriculture, although the primary use has
frequently been large-lot residential.
South-West Region
The districts of the City of Bunbury and of the Shires of Augusta-Margaret River, Boyup Brook,
Bridgetown-Greenbushes, Busselton, Capel, Collie, Dardanup, Donnybrook-Balingup, Harvey,
Manjimup and Nannup.
Subdivision
Division of land into lots.
Sustainable
Sustainability is about achieving as much as possible with as little as possible. This requires current
generations to minimise consumption and impacts on natural and other resources in order to continue
their activities in the long term and to maintain future options. It involves wealth creation, while
preserving our natural, ecological and cultural heritage, for the benefit of current and future
generations.
Sustainable Agriculture
Sustainable Agriculture is the use of farming practices and systems which maintain or enhance—
• the economic viability of agricultural production;
• the natural resource base; and
• natural ecosystems which are influenced by agricultural activities.
Farming practices and systems may include the use of “Best Practice” (where available), and may also
involve a diversification of agricultural pursuits. Standard farming practice and agricultural land use
which may be components of Sustainable Agriculture can include one or more of the following—
• grazing for beef and sheep production;
• dairy farming;
• horticulture;
• viticulture;
• floriculture;
• aquaculture;
• agro-forestry and farm forestry including tree plantings for wind breaks and shelter belts and
tree plantations.
Tourist Accommodation
Establishments which provide predominantly short-term accommodation (i.e. for periods of less than
two months) to the general public. These include hotels, motels and guest houses with and without
facilities; holiday flats, units and houses; and visitor hostels.
Caravan Parks which provide either predominantly short-term (i.e. for periods of less than two
months) or predominantly long-term (i.e. for periods of two months or more) accommodation to the
general public and which provide powered sites for caravans and toilet, shower and laundry facilities
(ABS, Tourism Accommodation, WA, 8635.5, June 1996).
Viticulture
The practice of cultivating and/or processing grapes for wine production.