State Planning Policy 5.4
Road and Rail Noise
September 2019
Prepared under Part Three of the Planning and Development Act 2005
by the Western Australian Planning Commission

click to follow
1. CITATION 1
2. POLICY INTENT 1
3. ROAD AND RAIL NOISE
Disclaimer IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA 1
This document has been produced by the
Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage
on behalf of the Western Australian Planning 4. POLICY APPLICATION 2
Commission. Any representation, statement,
opinion or advice expressed or implied in this 4.1 When and where
publication is made in good faith and on the it applies 2
basis that the Government, its employees and
4.2 Planning horizon 3
agents are not liable for any damage or loss
whatsoever which may occur as a result of 4.3 Policy exemptions 3
action taken or not taken, as the case may be,
in respect of any representation, statement,
5. POLICY OBJECTIVES 4
opinion or advice referred to herein.
Professional advice should be obtained before
applying the information contained in this
6. POLICY MEASURES 4
document to particular circumstances.
6.1 Noise targets 4
6.2 Noise exposure forecast 6
© Western Australian Planning Commission
6.3 Noise level contour map 6
Published by the
Western Australian Planning Commission 6.4 Noise management plan 6
Gordon Stephenson House 6.5 Implementation 6
140 William Street
Perth WA 6000
7. DEFINITIONS 9
Locked Bag 2506
Perth WA 6001
Published September 2019
website: www.dplh.wa.gov.au
email: info@dplh.wa.gov.au
tel: 08 6551 8002
fax: 08 6551 9001
National Relay Service: 13 36 77
This document is available in alternative
formats on application to the Department
of Planning, Lands and Heritage
Communications Branch.

State Planning Policy 5.4
1
Road and Rail Noise
September 2019
1 CITATION 2 POLICY INTENT 3 ROAD AND RAIL NOISE IN
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
This is a State Planning Policy prepared under Part Three The purpose of SPP 5.4 is to minimise the adverse impact
of the Planning and Development Act 2005. It may be of road and rail noise on noise-sensitive land-use and/ Road and rail transport corridors play a vital role in moving
cited as State Planning Policy No. 5.4 Road and Rail Noise or development within the specified trigger distance people and goods safely and efficiently around the State
(SPP 5.4). of strategic freight and major traffic routes and other and provide wide-ranging economic and social benefits
significant freight and traffic routes. to the community. However, road and rail noise can have
an adverse impact on human health and the amenity of
SPP 5.4 seeks to ensure that the community is protected
nearby communities, so it is important that a balanced
from unreasonable levels of transport noise, whilst
approach is taken in land-use planning and development.
also ensuring the future operations of these transport
corridors. Urban consolidation brings challenges when planning for
land near busy transport corridors. SPP 5.4 aims to ensure
SPP 5.4 should be read in conjunction with the Road and
acceptable levels of acoustic amenity can be achieved
Rail Noise Guidelines (the guidelines); and is supported by
through consideration of interface issues that balances
the Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage mapping
reasonable and practical considerations when noise-
which specifies the State’s transport routes and the
sensitive land-use and/or development is proposed in
policy’s trigger distances which can be viewed at www.
areas impacted by road and rail noise.
dplh.wa.gov.au.

State Planning Policy 5.4
2
Road and Rail Noise
September 2019
4 POLICY APPLICATION Table 1: Transport corridor classification and trigger distances
Trigger Distance
Transport corridor classification
4.1 When and where it applies distance measured from
SPP 5.4 applies to the preparation and assessment of
Roads
planning instruments, including region and local planning
schemes; planning strategies, structure plans; subdivision Strategic freight and major traffic routes
Road
and development proposals in Western Australia, where Roads as defined by Perth and Peel Planning Frameworks and/or roads 300
carriageway
with either 500 or more Class 7 to 12 Austroads vehicles per day, and/or metres
there is proposed: edge
50,000 per day traffic volume
(a) noise-sensitive land-use within the policy’s trigger
Other significant freight/traffic routes
distance of a transport corridor as specified in Table 1;
These are generally any State administered road and/or local government 200
Road
b) new or major upgrades of roads as specified in road identified as being a future State administered road (red road) metres
carriageway
Table 1 and maps (Schedule 1, 2 and 3); or and other roads that meets the criteria of either >= 100 Class 7 to 12 edge
Austroads vehicles daily or >= 23,000 daily traffic count (averaged
c) new railways or major upgrades of railways as equivalent to 25,000 vehicles passenger car units under region schemes).
specified in maps (Schedule 1, 2 and 3); or any
other works that increase capacity for rail vehicle Passenger railways
storage or movement and will result in an increased
100 Centreline of the
level of noise.
metres closest track
4.1.2 Policy trigger distances Freight railways
Table 1 identifies the State’s transport corridors and the 200 Centreline of the
trigger distances to which the policy applies. metres closest track
The designation of land within the trigger distances
outlined in Table 1 should not be interpreted to imply
that land is affected by noise and/or that areas outside the
trigger distances are un-affected by noise.
Where any part of the lot is within the specified trigger
distance, an assessment against the policy is required
to determine the likely level of transport noise and
management/ mitigation required. An initial screening
assessment (guidelines: Table 2: noise exposure
forecast) will determine if the lot is affected and to what
extent.

State Planning Policy 5.4
3
Road and Rail Noise
September 2019
Proponents are advised to consult with the decision c) modifications which may improve road capacity, b) planning proposals that do not result in
making authority as site specific conditions (significant performance or function, such as an intersection intensification of land-use for example no proposed
differences in ground levels, extreme noise levels) may expansion, grade separation or the like. increase in the number of approved dwellings from
influence the noise mitigation measures required, that that existing;
may extend beyond the trigger distance. 4.1.5 Railways c) to increases in road and rail traffic noise in the
absence of physical construction works;
Passenger and freight railways are identified in maps
4.1.3 Noise-sensitive land-use and/or d) to ongoing works such as routine maintenance,
(Schedule 1, 2 and 3) and the Department’s public
development re-sealing, minor changes in alignment or minor
mapping viewer.
changes required for safety reasons, unless such
This is generally determined by land-uses or development A major upgrade of a railway means:
works would result in a significant increase in
as zoned by a local planning scheme or structure plan
a) a proposed realignment, either inside or outside the transport noise levels that has an adverse impact
that is occupied or designed for occupation or use for
existing corridor; on human health and the amenity of nearby
residential purposes (including dwellings, residential
communities;
buildings or short-stay accommodation), caravan park, b) a rail track duplication; or
e) to fixed sources of noise such as, but not limited
camping ground, educational establishment, child care c) works that are likely to adversely affect a noise-
to, horns, warning bells and sirens, safety warning
premises, hospital, nursing home, corrective institution; or sensitive land-use, such as the installation of
devices installed on road or rail vehicles;
place of worship. switches/turnouts, signalling systems, spurs or
passing loops, the modification to the track support f) to freight handling facilities;
4.1.4 Roads structure, crossovers, refuges, and relief lines. g) to any noise produced during the actual construction
of new road and rail infrastructure, which is governed
Roads to which the policy applies are identified in maps 4.2 Planning horizon by the Environmental Protection (Noise) Regulations
(Schedule 1, 2 and 3) and the Department’s public 1997; and
mapping viewer. These roads have been identified as their The application of SPP 5.4 should consider future
h) to aircraft or watercraft transport noise.
freight function and or high traffic volumes are considered development and associated increases in traffic
to significantly generate noise in excess of the policies anticipated for the next 20 years from when the noise
noise targets. assessment has been undertaken. This includes any
transport corridor proposals where there is sufficient
A major upgrade of an existing road involves:
certainty regarding the corridor’s alignment and function.
a) physical construction works designed to facilitate
an increase in traffic-carrying capacity (such as
4.3 Policy exemptions
carriageway duplication or the addition of a traffic
lane); SPP 5.4 does not apply:
a) substantial change in the alignment that moves the
a) retrospectively to existing noise-sensitive land-use
asset closer to existing noise-sensitive land-use; or
and/or development within the policy’s trigger
distance of existing railways or roads;

State Planning Policy 5.4
4
Road and Rail Noise
September 2019
5. POLICY OBJECTIVES 6 POLICY MEASURES 6.1 Noise targets
Table 2 sets out noise targets that are to be achieved
The objectives of SPP 5.4 are to: The policy applies a performance-based approach to
by proposals under which the policy applies. Where
the management and mitigation of transport noise. The
(a) protect the community from unreasonable levels of
exceeded, an assessment is required to determine
policy measures and resultant noise mitigation will be
transport noise;
the likely level of transport noise and management/
influenced by the function of the transport corridor and
b) protect strategic and other significant freight mitigation required.
the type and intensity of the land-use proposed. Where
transport corridors from incompatible urban
there is risk of future land-use conflict in close proximity to In the application of the noise targets the objective is to
encroachment;
strategic freight routes, a precautionary approach should achieve:
c) ensure transport infrastructure and land-use can be applied.
• indoor noise levels as specified in Table 2 in noise-
mutually exist within urban corridors;
Planning should also consider other broader planning sensitive areas (for example, bedrooms and living
d) ensure that noise impacts are addressed as early as
policies. This is to ensure a balanced approach takes into rooms of houses, and school classrooms); and
possible in the planning process; and
consideration reasonable and practical considerations.
• a reasonable degree of acoustic amenity for outdoor
e) encourage best practice noise mitigation design and Refer to the guidelines for more information.
living areas on each residential lot. For non-residential
construction standards.
noise-sensitive developments, for example schools
and child care centres the design of outdoor areas
should take into consideration the noise target.
It is recognised that in some instances, it may not be
reasonable and/or practicable to meet the outdoor noise
targets. Where transport noise is above the noise targets,
measures are expected to be implemented that balance
reasonable and practicable considerations with the need
to achieve acceptable noise protection outcomes.

State Planning Policy 5.4
5
Road and Rail Noise
September 2019
Table 2: Noise targets
Noise targets
Outdoor Indoor
Proposals New/upgrade
Day Night
(LAeq(Day) dB) (LAeq(Night) dB) (LAeq dB)
(6 am–10 pm) (10 pm–6 am)
Noise-sensitive New noise-sensitive land-use L (Day)
Aeq
land-use and/or and/or development within 40 (living and work
development the trigger distance of an 55 50 areas)
existing/proposed transport L (Night) 35
Aeq
corridor (bedrooms)
New 55 50 NA
Roads
Upgrade 60 55 NA
New 55 50 NA
Railways
Upgrade 60 55 NA
Notes:
• The noise target is to be measured at one metre from the most exposed, habitable façade of the proposed building,
which has the greatest exposure to the noise-source. A habitable room has the same meaning as defined in State
Planning Policy 3.1 Residential Design Codes
• For all noise-sensitive land-use and/or development, indoor noise targets for other room usages may be reasonably
drawn from Table 1 of Australian Standard/New Zealand Standard AS/NZS 2107:2016 Acoustics – Recommended
design sound levels and reverberation times for building interiors (as amended) for each relevant time period.
• The 5dB difference in the criteria between new and upgrade infrastructure proposals acknowledges the challenges in
achieving noise level reduction where existing infrastructure is surrounded by existing noise-sensitive development.
• Outdoor targets are to be met at all outdoor areas as far as is reasonable and practical to do so using the various noise
mitigation measures outlined in the guidelines. For example, it is likely unreasonable for a transport infrastructure
provider to achieve the outdoor targets at more than 1 or 2 floors of an adjacent development with direct line of sight
to the traffic.

State Planning Policy 5.4
6
Road and Rail Noise
September 2019
6.2 Noise exposure forecast If the noise level contour map identifies that no part of the 6.5 Implementation
site is estimated to be affected by noise levels above the
When it is determined that SPP 5.4 applies to a planning As a general principle, noise should be considered at the
criteria, no further measures are required.
proposal as outlined in Section 4, proponents and/or earliest stages of the planning process and not defer its
decision makers are required to undertake a preliminary resolution or management to subdivision or development
6.4 Noise management plan
assessment using Table 2: noise exposure forecast assessment stage, where mitigation options are more
in the guidelines. This will provide an estimate of the limited.
Preparation of a noise management plan by a suitably
potential noise impacts on noise-sensitive land-use and/
qualified professional acoustics engineer or consultant is Planning proposals are generally to be accompanied by
or development within the trigger distance of a specified
required early in the planning process to determine actual the following information where deemed appropriate and
transport corridor. The outcomes of the initial assessment
noise levels across the subject site and demonstrate that prepared in accordance with the guidelines:
will determine whether:
the proposal can adequately mitigate the noise impacts
• Noise exposure forecast table assessment; and/or
• no further measures is required; through use of noise attenuation measures. Noise
• Noise level contour map; and/or
management plans already approved by the relevant state
• noise-sensitive land-use and/or development is
agency responsible for noise at the time of gazettal of this • Noise management plan, outlining the proposed noise
acceptable subject to deemed-to-comply mitigation
policy are deemed to be satisfactory. mitigations measures.
measures; or
• noise-sensitive land-use and/or development is not Noise management plans are required where: The level and recommended type of noise management
recommended. Any noise-sensitive land-use and/ and mitigation measure will be dependent on the
a) proposals fall into exposure categories D and E in the
or development is subject to mitigation measures severity of the noise source, the type and intensity of the
noise exposure forecast table;
outlined in a noise management plan. proposed land-use, the function of the transport corridor
b) strategic planning, region and local planning scheme
and the information available at the particular stage of the
and amendments, structure plans and activity centre
6.3 Noise level contour map planning.
plans adjacent to a specified proposed road or
Where it is determined that noise impacts on noise- railway identified in the policy’s mapping, which is There is a general presumption against approving
sensitive land-use and/or development within the trigger not yet planned for construction but is anticipated proposals that cannot achieve the policy’s noise targets.
distance of Table 1 is likely, then a noise level contour within 20 years; However it is acknowledged that in some circumstances, it
may not be reasonable or practicable for the policy’s noise
map can be used to inform planning proposals on the c) a new or major upgrade of a road or railway is
targets to be met.
likely impacts of transport noise upon the subject site. located adjacent to urban zoned land with the
The map illustrates the likely noise levels and associated potential to accommodate noise-sensitive land-use Discretion may be exercised by the decision-maker to
noise exposure categories as per Table 2: noise exposure and/or development; and take into consideration reasonable and practical matters
forecast in the guidelines and can be either prepared d) where all practicable steps to avoid or minimise including:
using the noise level information contained within transport noise have been taken but the noise levels
• the requirements of other relevant plans and policies;
the noise exposure forecast table or more commonly are predicted or measured to exceed the policy’s
• the impact of proposed mitigation measures on the
prepared using site-specific noise level information noise target.
amenity of the built environment;
provided by a suitably qualified acoustic consultant/
engineer at the discretion of the decision maker.

State Planning Policy 5.4
7
Road and Rail Noise
September 2019
• the seasonality of train movements, particularly in 6.5.2 Region and local planning scheme and c) quiet house requirements and or other noise
regional towns; and amendments, structure plans and activity mitigation in accordance with the guidelines.
centre plans
• advice received from relevant referral agencies.
6.5.3.1 Conditions of subdivision and development
The above planning instrument’s will address the impact
Justification as to why the noise targets cannot be
achieved and whether the noise can be reduced to of noise through: The decision-maker may impose conditions on
an acceptable level should be documented by the a) identification of appropriate compatible land-use subdivision and development applications requiring
proponent and considered by the decision maker. zoning that is commensurate with the function of the implementation of mitigation measures as outlined
in the guidelines in particular Table 2: noise exposure
the transport corridor;
The guidelines assist in outlining ways in which some
forecast or a noise management plan. These may
reasonable and practicable limitations can be addressed in b) design solutions that utilise street and lot
include the construction of physical barriers, quiet house
a manner that also minimise transport noise. configuration to screen and/or buffer noise;
requirements or the need for more detailed planning
c) consideration of density and built form outcomes
through the preparation of a local development plan.
6.5.1 High-order strategic planning that will help alleviate and/or manage noise; Noise management plans must be completed and
d) outlining the need for additional noise mitigation approved prior to conditional approval of the subdivision
Strategic planning documents such as planning
measures through quiet house requirements and or proposal.
frameworks and strategies should seek to avoid the risk of
noise barriers in accordance with the guidelines; and
future land-use conflict with noise by: Notifications on title are required as a condition
e) consideration to appropriate future planning
of subdivision (including strata subdivision) and
(a) identifying the location of relevant transport corridors provisions to ensure more detailed planning is
development approval informing of the existence of
on maps and clearly distinguishing the function of undertaken at the subdivision and development
transport noise where existing and or forecasted noise
the transport corridor; stage.
levels are to exceed the policy’s outdoor noise targets.
(b) outlining design solutions commensurate with the
function of the transport corridor and preferred land- 6.5.3 Subdivision and development
6.5.4 Major road and railway proposals
use interface; and
Subdivision and development applications should
(c) demonstrating that the noise impact on the New or major upgrades of roads and railway construction
take into consideration any previous planning, noise
proposed noise-sensitive land-use and/or proposals in existing reserves generally do not require
assessment and/or noise management plan conducted
development is to be addressed at the next stage planning approval as public works are exempt from the
earlier in the planning process and any existing planning
of the planning process to meet the policy’s noise development assessment process under the deemed
controls in place.
targets. provisions of the Public Works Act 1902. However
Subdivision and development should seek to manage and infrastructure providers, operators and governing bodies
avoid land-use conflict through: are encouraged to continuously enhance assets to reduce
noise and to carry out works in a manner that is consistent
a) the design of the street, lot and building
with SPP 5.4.
configuration in accordance with the guidelines;
b) consideration to the preparation of a site specific
local development plan; and

State Planning Policy 5.4
8
Road and Rail Noise
September 2019
To achieve overall noise management outcomes, Proposals that fall within the policies trigger distance for
proposals for new or major upgrade of roads and railways a railway that is subject to a State Agreement Act shall
within the scope of this policy should consider: be referred to the relevant agency responsible for the
administration of the State Agreement Act.
a) route selection and alignment that is commensurate
with the function of the transport corridor and
preferred land-use interface;
b) natural topography to shield the transport corridor,
reducing the reliance on noise walls; and
c) acquiring or preserving adequate space in the
corridor reserve to ensure that mitigation measures
can be achieved.
Proposals for a major road and railway are to be
accompanied by the following information in accordance
with the guidelines:
a) A noise management plan to determine actual noise
levels accounting for any relevant adjacent zoning
under an applicable region or local scheme.
b) Demonstrate that the proposal can adequately
mitigate the noise impacts which include at-source
mitigation.
6.5.5 State authority advice on noise
The advice of the State authority responsible for noise
regulation is to be sought and considered by the decision-
maker in the preparation and determination of all
proposals outlined in Sections 6.5.1 to 6.5.4 where:
a) compliance with these policy measures is unlikely to
be achieved;
b) additional/alternative noise mitigation measures are
proposed; and/or
c) assumptions informing noise management plans are
not agreed to by a decision-maker.

State Planning Policy 5.4
9
Road and Rail Noise
September 2019
7 DEFINITIONS
A- weighted level L noise management plan
Aeq
A level which includes the frequency-weighting network The equivalent steady-state, A-weighted sound level Site specific noise assessment and recommended
‘A’ (see AS IEC 61672.2-2004) to approximate the which in a specified time period contains the same mitigation measures to accompany planning proposals.
frequency response of the normal human ear. acoustic energy as the time-varying level during the same
period. noise-sensitive land-use and/or development
dB
Land-uses or development occupied or designed
L (Day)
Decibel. A unit used to measure the intensity of a sound. Aeq for occupation or use for residential purposes
The L (16 hour) for the time period 6 am to 10 pm. (including dwellings, residential buildings or short-
Aeq
development stay accommodation), caravan park, camping ground,
L (Night) educational establishment, child care premises, hospital,
As defined in the Planning and Development Act 2005. Aeq
nursing home, corrective institution or place of worship.
Development includes land-use, but for the purpose of The L (8 hour) for the time period 10 pm to 6 am.
Aeq
this policy does not include subdivision.
outdoor living area
noise
Class 7 to 12 As defined in the State Planning Policy 3.1 Residential
Sound that is unwanted, unpleasant or loud. For
Austroads Design Codes as the area external to a single house,
the purposes of this policy, noise does not include
vehicles per day grouped or multiple dwelling to be used in conjunction
regenerated noise or vibration.
with that dwelling such that it is capable of active or
Refer to appendix 6 of the guidelines.
passive use and is readily accessible from the dwelling.
noise exposure forecast
intensification of land-use
Table 2- Noise exposure forecast table of the guidelines reasonable and practicable
Creation of a new noise-sensitive land-use and/or which provides noise forecast levels that are used to
Refer to section 3.2.1 of the guidelines.
development. inform an initial screening assessment.
transport infrastructure provider
a habitable room noise level contour map
An agency responsible for the design, construction and/
As defined in State Planning Policy 3.1 Residential Design Scale map to illustrate noise forecast levels and associated
or management of transport infrastructure as identified
Codes. noise exposure categories informed by either an
by this policy, including local and State government
initial screening assessment or by more detailed noise
agencies.
prediction calculations in a noise management plan.