PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT ACT 2005
_________
STATE PLANNING POLICY 2.8
BUSHLAND POLICY FOR THE
PERTH METROPOLITAN REGION
———————————
PREPARED UNDER SECTION 26 OF THE PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT ACT 2005 BY THE WESTERN AUSTRALIAN
PLANNING COMMISSION.



22 June 2010 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2743
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT ACT 2005
STATE PLANNING POLICY 2.8
BUSHLAND POLICY FOR THE PERTH METROPOLITAN REGION
CONTENTS
1. Citation
2. Introduction and background
2.1 Policy aims
2.2 Perth’s bushland
2.3 General policy context
3. Application of the policy
3.1 Bush Forever areas
3.2 Local bushland
4. Policy objectives
5. Policy measures
5.1 Bush Forever areas
5.2 Local bushland
6. Implementation
Figure 1: Policy measures framework
Figure 2: Impact assessment process for Bush Forever areas
Appendix 1: Bush Forever areas (all) impact assessment process
Appendix 2: Bush Forever areas (all) impact assessment criteria
Appendix 3: Bush Forever areas (rural lands)—Best practice criteria for rural-living subdivision
for conservation and rural development
Appendix 4: Bush Forever areas (all) Offsets Criteria
Glossary
References
Map 1: Bush Forever areas



22 June 2010 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2745
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT ACT 2005
STATE PLANNING POLICY 2.8
BUSHLAND POLICY FOR THE PERTH METROPOLITAN REGION
1. CITATION
This is a State Planning Policy prepared under section 26 of the Planning and Development Act 2005.
It may be cited as State Planning Policy 2.8: Bushland Policy for the Perth Metropolitan Region. For
the purpose of this document, it will be referred to as the policy.
2. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
2.1 Policy aims
The aim of the policy is to provide a policy and implementation framework that will ensure bushland
protection and management issues in the Perth Metropolitan Region are appropriately addressed and
integrated with broader land use planning and decision-making. This will secure long-term protection
of biodiversity and associated environmental values.
The policy recognises the protection and management of significant bushland areas as a fundamental
consideration in the planning process, while also seeking to integrate and balance wider
environmental, social and economic considerations. In general terms, the policy does not prevent
development where it consistent with the policy measures in this policy and other planning and
environmental considerations.
2.2 Perth’s bushland
The South-West Botanical Province, in which Perth lies, is one of the most biologically diverse regions
in the world and is home to a broad range of ecological communities and plant species, a large portion
of which are endemic to the province.
Aside from its botanical and habitat values, bushland plays a crucial role in meeting a variety of
environmental, social and economic needs (sometimes referred to as ecosystem services), such as:
maintaining water and air quality; wetland protection and hydrological functions; the prevention of
land degradation; visual amenity and areas for walking and informal nature-based recreation and
education. Bushland is therefore an essential part of an area’s environmental (green) infrastructure
and a critical ingredient in the successful delivery of wider biodiversity, ecological, natural resource
management and sustainability outcomes. Bush Forever sites identified in Bush Forever (Government
of Western Australia 2000a, 2000b and 2000c) are a key component of this environmental
infrastructure and key elements in our move towards achieving an ecologically sustainable city.
2.3 Legislative Context—Clearing Controls
On 8 July 2004 new clearing controls came into effect regulating the clearing of native vegetation
under Part 9 of the Environmental Protection Act 1986. The clearing controls generally require the
obtaining of permits for the clearing of native vegetation.
As part of the regulatory changes, under the Environmental Protection (Environmentally Sensitive
Areas) Notice 2005 the Bush Forever sites were classified as environmentally sensitive areas except to
the extent to which the site is approved to be developed by the Western Australian Planning
Commission (WAPC) to recognise the environmental significance of these sites. To the extent of such
development approval, a clearing permit will not be required under the clearing controls if the
clearing is “prescribed clearing” defined in Regulation 5 of the Environmental Protection (Clearing of
Native Vegetation) Regulations 2004. Thus, in respect of prescribed clearing on a Bush Forever site, a
decision of the WAPC will be the decision under the clearing controls.
Additionally, in considering whether to grant a permit under the clearing controls in respect of a
Bush Forever site, the Department of Environment and Conservation will have due regard to the
advice of planning authorities on planning issues.
It is therefore imperative that planners understand the environmental significance of the Bush
Forever sites and the range of policies, processes and outcomes to consider in making planning
decisions and recommendations that will operate under and be consistent with the clearing controls.

2746 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 22 June 2010
2.4 General policy context
The WAPC has prepared State Planning Policy 2: Environment and Natural Resources Policy, as a
broad overarching sectoral policy for environmental and natural resource planning in Western
Australia. Under its biodiversity policy measures, areas of high biodiversity and conservation value
are identified, which include sites identified in Bush Forever. This policy is a supplementary policy
under the environment and natural resources policy and seeks to address, in more detail, the
protection and management of significant bushland areas, particularly those identified for protection
through strategies and processes at the regional and local level in the Perth Metropolitan Region.
More specifically, it addresses the protection and management of Bush Forever sites, as identified in
Bush Forever.
Bush Forever has been endorsed by the Western Australian Government and, for the area covered by
the plan, undertakes to implement components of the Western Australian Government’s
commitments in the Environmental Protection Act 1986, Urban Bushland Strategy (Government of
Western Australia 1995); the international Convention on Biological Diversity (1992); the
Commonwealth Government’s National Strategy for the Conservation of Australia’s Biodiversity
(1996); the Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999, and other
international, national and State level policies and agreements.
Bush Forever identifies 51 200 hectares of regionally significant bushland recommended for protection
and management in 287 Bush Forever sites, and includes lands with either some level of protection or
unprotected land in both public and private ownership.
Through a range of mechanisms, including reservation and acquisition, negotiated planning solutions
and the use of advice, assistance and incentive programs to support private conservation
management, Bush Forever seeks to protect a target of at least 10 per cent of the original extent of
each vegetation complex within the Perth Metropolitan Region portion of the Swan Coastal Plain.
Some areas of bushland and wetlands outside Bush Forever sites may have regional values, but were
not identified for protection and management because of wider social and economic considerations.
Rare flora, threatened ecological communities or regionally significant wetlands outside Bush Forever
sites are protected through other government policies and legislation.
This policy provides the policy and implementation framework for Bush Forever areas shown in the
Metropolitan Region Scheme, which cover Bush Forever sites.
The policy also supports the preparation of local bushland protection strategies by all local
governments in the Perth Metropolitan Region. This will enable the identification of locally
significant bushland sites for protection and management outside Bush Forever areas. The need for
such strategies was identified in Bush Forever, the Urban Bushland Strategy and the State Planning
Strategy. In addition, the National Local Government Biodiversity Strategy (Australian Local
Government Association 1999) identified the need to prepare local biodiversity strategies. Bushland is
an important component of biodiversity and therefore local bushland protection strategies should
form part of a wider local biodiversity strategy, or similar, where possible. Local biodiversity
strategies recognise the importance of natural areas of native vegetation that do not fall within the
definition of bushland, or naturally non-vegetated environments.
Local bushland protection strategies, biodiversity strategies or similar, should form part of or be set
in the context of local or regional planning strategies and wider social and economic considerations.
To assist local government, draft local biodiversity planning guidelines have been prepared by the
Western Australian Local Government Association (2004).
3. APPLICATION OF THE POLICY
The policy applies to the Perth Metropolitan Region, and deals with two distinct subjects, being Bush
Forever areas and local bushland.
3.1 Bush Forever areas
The policy measures in section 5.1 apply to any proposal or decision-making that is likely to have an
adverse impact on regionally significant bushland within a Bush Forever area.
For the purposes of clarity, an adverse impact includes direct impacts (through the clearing of
regionally significant bushland) and indirect impacts (such as development abutting regionally
significant bushland within a Bush Forever area which will have a significant indirect impact). The
policy does not apply if a proposal or decision has no adverse impact on regionally significant
bushland within a Bush Forever area.
Existing cleared or developed areas within Bush Forever areas are not intended for protection
through this policy or excluded from future development. However, any likely significant indirect
impact on regionally significant bushland may be subject to planning or environmental controls.
Map 1 (at the rear of this policy) identifies Bush Forever areas, their associated site implementation
categories (section 5.1.2) and mapped regionally significant bushland within Bush Forever areas.
Bush Forever areas are also identified in the Metropolitan Region Scheme.
Map 1 forms part of this State Planning Policy and Bush Forever areas may be amended from time to
time through amendments to this policy and complementary amendments to the Metropolitan Region
Scheme. Site implementation categories may also be amended through amendments to this policy.
Mapped regionally significant bushland within a Bush Forever area as shown on map 1 is for
indicative purposes only and may be subject to on-site verification.

22 June 2010 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2747
3.2 Local bushland
The policy measures in section 5.2 apply to all areas of bushland outside Bush Forever areas within
the Perth Metropolitan Region.
4. POLICY OBJECTIVES
The three key objectives of this policy are—
• to establish a conservation system at the regional level (through Bush Forever areas and to
operate with the clearing controls under the Environmental Protection Act 1986) that is, as
far as is achievable, comprehensive, adequate and representative of the ecological
communities of the Swan Coastal Plain portion of the Perth Metropolitan Region;1
• to seek to protect and manage significant bushland recommended for protection and
management for conservation purposes through a range of implementation mechanisms and
as a collective and shared responsibility and general duty of care on the part of government,
landowners and the community; and
• to provide a policy and implementation framework for significant bushland areas
recommended for protection and management to assist conservation planning, planning
assessment and decision-making processes.
This implementation framework will ensure—
• consistency, transparency and certainty for landowners, decision-makers and the
broader community;
• integrated and balanced environmental, social and economic outcomes;
• existing planning or environmental commitments or approvals are recognised; and
• development and land uses which are compatible with bushland protection and/or
provide for an improved environmental outcome are supported and incorporate best-
practice, performance-based planning, design and management outcomes.
5. POLICY MEASURES
The policy measures in this policy (Figure 1) identify specific information requirements, issues
requiring special consideration and, more specifically, planning assessment and decision-making
criteria and processes for bushland areas in the Perth Metropolitan Region.
Bush Forever areas (section 5.1)
The general policy measures (section 5.1.1) apply to regionally significant bushland within all Bush
Forever areas. The specific policy measures (section 5.1.2) apply to regionally significant bushland
within Bush Forever area site implementation categories, as applicable, and apply in addition to the
general policy measures. Map 1 identifies the Bush Forever areas and their associated site
implementation categories.
The five site implementation categories defined by this policy include Bush Forever reserves (existing
or proposed); urban, industrial or resource development; government lands or public infrastructure;
rural lands; and regional creek lines. The key characteristics of these categories are explained in the
glossary at the rear of this policy.
Local bushland (section 5.2)
The local bushland policy measures apply to all areas of bushland outside Bush Forever areas and
support the preparation of a local bushland protection strategy by all local governments within the
Perth Metropolitan Region as a preferred basis for decision-making.
5.1 Bush Forever areas
5.1.1 General policy measures for all Bush Forever areas
Application: Regionally significant bushland within all Bush Forever areas identified in the
Metropolitan Region Scheme and on map 1 (and any subsequent amendments).
Impact assessment process
Proposals or decision-making should—
(i) Recognise regionally significant bushland protection and its management as a primary
purpose and a fundamental planning consideration in its own right as part of an area’s
essential environmental (green) infrastructure.
(ii) Ensure that all reasonable steps have been taken to avoid, minimise or offset (in combination,
generally meaning to mitigate) any likely adverse impacts on regionally significant bushland
consistent with the requirements of this policy.
1 For this purpose, this policy and Bush Forever recognise a target of at least 10 per cent of the original extent of
each vegetation complex (as representative of ecological communities at the regional scale) for the Swan Coastal
Plain portion of the Perth Metropolitan Region, which is recognised as a constrained area. However, there may be
further opportunities to achieve greater representation through the protection of vegetation complexes on less
constrained portions of the Swan Coastal Plain outside the Perth Metropolitan Region (with reference to the 30
per cent target established for ecological communities in the Commonwealth Government’s National Objectives
and Targets for Biodiversity Conservation (2001–2005), which is the threshold level below which species loss
appears to accelerate exponentially (Environment Protection Authority Position Statement No. 2, 2000).

2748 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 22 June 2010
(iii) Adopt or incorporate the impact assessment process and criteria as set out in Appendix 1 and
2 where there is likely to be an unavoidable adverse impact on regionally significant
bushland within a Bush Forever area consistent with the requirements of the policy (Figure 2
provides guidance on the impact assessment process which applies in addition to normal
planning and environmental information requirements and considerations).
(iv) Recognise that once a site has been negotiated and an outcome agreed in accordance with the
policy measures in this policy, there will be a general presumption against the clearing of
regionally significant bushland identified for protection, unless there is an improved
environmental outcome.
(v) Have regard to other relevant policies in respect to bushland and wetland areas, including
Bush Forever (Government of Western Australia 2000a and 2000c) and its related site
implementation Practice Notes (Government of Western Australia 2000b), A Strategic Plan
for Perth’s Greenways Final Report (Alan Tingay and Associates, 1997), and any detailed
guidelines, planning bulletins, practice notes and operational policies that supplement this
policy on particular matters.
These should be read in conjunction with this policy. In the event of any inconsistencies, this policy
will prevail.
Bush Forever area boundaries
Proposals or decision-making should—
(vi) Recognise that Bush Forever area boundaries and the regionally significant bushland
therein, have been defined using the best available information but may be subject to further
analysis, verification and changes as a result of new information, on-ground site
investigations, landowner consultation or as part of the implementation of this policy.
Regionally significant bushland within a Bush Forever area as shown on map 1 is for
information purposes only and may be subject to on-site verification.
Regionally significant bushland management
Proposals or decision-making should—
(vii) Encourage, support and require, consistent with this policy, bushland management plans and
the management of regionally significant bushland for conservation purposes.
(viii) Support co-ordinated bushland management advice and assistance through the Department
of Environment and Conservation, in conjunction with other relevant government and non-
government agencies.
5.1.2 Specific policy measures for Bush Forever area (BFA) site implementation categories
5.1.2.1 BFA—Bush Forever reserves (existing or proposed)
Application
Where land includes—
• regionally significant bushland within the Bush Forever reserves (existing or proposed) site
implementation category on map 1 (and any subsequent amendments); or
• regionally significant bushland proposed for and/or reserved for parks and recreation in the
Metropolitan Region Scheme through the ongoing implementation of Bush Forever located
within another site implementation category on map 1.
Proposals or decision-making should—
(i) Support a general presumption against the clearing of regionally significant bushland, or
other degrading activities, except where a proposal or decision—
(a) is consistent with existing approved uses or existing planning/environmental
commitments or approvals; or
(b) is in accordance with a management plan approved under the Conservation and Land
Management Act 1984; or
(c) is a compatible operation or necessary operation carried out under the Conservation
and Land Management Act 1984; or
(d) is in accordance with a management plan, or similar, which has been endorsed by the
WAPC and has appropriately considered bushland protection requirements; or
(e) is consistent with the overall purpose and intent of an existing Crown reserve or can be
reasonably justified with regard to wider environmental, social, economic or
recreational needs, and all reasonable alternatives have been considered in order to
avoid or minimise any direct loss of regionally significant bushland, and reasonable
offset strategies are secured to offset any loss of regionally significant bushland, where
appropriate and practical.
(ii) Consider opportunities for reviews, rationalisations and reconfigurations of existing Bush
Forever reserves that do not contain regionally significant bushland and have no ecosystem
value, or which provide for an improved environmental outcome.
(iii) Consider private land conservation initiatives to protect and manage Bush Forever reserves
(existing or proposed) in private ownership as an alternative to State acquisition, where
appropriate, particularly where public access or public land management for conservation is
not requirement.

22 June 2010 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2749
(iv) Support management orders in favour of conservation for Crown reserves under the
Land Administration Act 1997, where appropriate, to provide added long-term security.
(v) Require the preparation and implementation of a bushland management plan to
manage the Bush Forever reserve for conservation purposes once it is consolidated in
government ownership; and, prior to this, support the implementation of interim land
management measures by the responsible authority for areas in government
ownership.
(vi) Seek to reserve all government-owned Bush Forever reserves (existing or proposed) for
parks and recreation in the Metropolitan Region Scheme to provide added planning
security and protection.
5.1.2.2 BFA—Urban, industrial or resource development
Application
Where land includes—
• regionally significant bushland within the urban, industrial or resource development site
implementation category on map 1 (and any subsequent amendments); or
• regionally significant bushland identified as a priority resource location, key extraction area
or extraction area in State Planning Policy 2.4: Basic Raw Materials (Government of Western
Australia 2000), or containing pre-existing mining commitments or approvals, or with Mining
Act 1978 tenements that contain identified titanium mineralisation, all of which may be
located within another site implementation category on map 1.
Proposals or decision-making should—
(i) Recognise regionally significant bushland in this category as constrained by existing
commitments, approvals (including existing mining operations, which may continue to
operate in accordance with their existing levels of extraction approvals) and policies and seek
a reasonable balance between conservation and development or resource extraction through a
negotiated outcome, having regard for the specific conservation values involved.
(ii) Recognise that for urban and industrial land/s appropriately zoned in the local town planning
scheme and able to be developed in isolation this will generally involve a ‘stand-alone’
negotiated planning solution with a bushland retention target for each site determined on a
case-by-case basis, but with a retention benchmark of generally not less than 30 per cent,
subject to an area’s overall planning and environmental opportunities and constraints.
(iii) Seek strategic outcomes, which include the following—
(a) Structure planning to facilitate the strategic co-ordination of bushland protection and
development requirements to set aside regionally significant bushland for protection
and management in its entirety, where possible.
This approach will apply at the early stages of planning where development or
subdivision approval has not been granted or where an affected area is in fragmented
ownership and requires land co-ordination to enable it to be developed. This may
involve cost contributions or other equitable cost-sharing arrangements, towards the
protection of regionally significant bushland as part of an area’s essential
environmental infrastructure.
(b) Wider strategic packages in accordance with the relevant principles established for
Bush Forever sustainability strategies (section 5.1.2.3, specific policy measure ii) where
a landowner or company has a number of land assets and there will be greater scope to
protect regionally significant bushland in its entirety.
(iv) Recognise that for resource extraction areas, a strategic outcome (specific policy measure
5.1.2.2, iii, b above) is the favoured approach, and that there may be overriding restrictions
on future extraction for environmental reasons.
Opportunities for improved environmental outcomes for lands with existing resource
commitments, approvals and operations should be sought.
(v) Ensure that regionally significant bushland identified for protection and management as part
of a negotiated outcome is clearly demarcated on any plan of approval as a reserve for
conservation and is vested with an appropriate management body under the relevant
legislation and in accordance with standard requirements, unless it is agreed that equivalent
protection and management measures can be secured through other statutory controls, such
as a conservation covenant and management agreement.
(vi) Seek to reserve the conservation area to be protected through a negotiated outcome for parks
and recreation in the Metropolitan Region Scheme once it has been secured for conservation
through the planning process or through a legal agreement, unless agreed otherwise.
(vii) Recognise that the conservation area will be generally set aside free of cost over and above
the normal 10 per cent public open space contribution and will not form part of the
developable area for the purposes of calculating the 10 per cent public open space
contribution.
The WAPC may accept whole or part of the conservation area as a component of the 10 per
cent open space contribution where it is demonstrated that—
• the conservation area or portion serves a local passive recreational function which is
consistent with the values of the bushland and the conservation management objectives
for the site;

2750 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 22 June 2010
• management infrastructure and other measures are provided that support the use and
management of the conservation area in accordance with an endorsed management
plan;
• it is acceptable to the future proposed management body, relevant environmental
agencies and local government;
• the overall “land take” for open space is likely to jeopardise the overall development
viability of the project, based on evidence supplied to the decision-making body; and
• other planning and environmental considerations and policies of the WAPC have been
taken into account.
5.1.2.3 BFA—Government lands or public infrastructure
Application
Where land includes—
• regionally significant bushland within the government lands or public infrastructure site
implementation category on map 1 (and any subsequent amendments); or
• regionally significant bushland located within another site implementation category on map 1
that is likely to be adversely affected by existing or proposed public infrastructure or utility
services.
Proposals or decision-making should—
(i) Seek to protect regionally significant bushland as a priority, except where a proposal or
decision—
(a) is consistent with the overall purpose and intent of an existing reserve, existing
approved uses and/or existing planning or environmental commitments or approvals, in
particular, existing reserves for roads (regional or local), railways, pipelines, water or
drainage services and any associated emergency maintenance works, with any impacts
minimised and managed, where practical, in accordance with existing environmental
management plan best practice requirements; or
(b) is in accordance with a master plan, management plan, or similar, which has been
endorsed by the WAPC and has appropriately considered bushland protection
requirements; or
(c) can be reasonably justified with regard to wider environmental, social and economic
considerations (in particular, future road (regional or local) and rail requirements) and
all reasonable alternatives have been considered to avoid or minimise any direct loss of
regionally significant bushland, and reasonable offset strategies are considered to offset
any loss of regionally significant bushland, where appropriate and practical.
(d) is the subject of an agreement between the public authority and the Commission
(ii) Seek to optimise the protection of regionally significant bushland through strategic
assessments of land assets (named Bush Forever sustainability strategies) owned by each
affected State government agency as part of government agency sustainability action plans,
as required by the State Sustainability Strategy 2003 and with reference to Leading by
Example: The sustainability code of practice for government agencies and resource guide for
implementation (Government of Western Australia, 2004); and support similar approaches by
local government and Commonwealth agencies.
Bush Forever sustainability strategies should review affected land assets to achieve strategic
outcomes that effectively integrate and balance environmental, social and economic
considerations, in consultation and agreement with the WAPC and other relevant
government agencies. In the interim, elements of these strategies should be implemented; in
particular management plans for lands in government ownership.
(iii) Seek to reserve lands that are already managed or recognised for conservation, or lands of the
highest conservation value, for parks and recreation in the Metropolitan Region Scheme to
provide added planning security and protection, while recognising existing management
arrangements, uses and the future management requirements of the responsible
management body.
(iv) Support management orders in favour of conservation under the Land Administration
Act 1997 for Crown reserves already managed or recognised for conservation or unallocated,
or of the highest conservation value.
5.1.2.4 BFA—Rural lands
Application: Regionally significant bushland within the rural lands site implementation category on
map 1 (and any subsequent amendments).
Proposals or decision-making should—
(i) Support private land conservation initiatives through planning mechanisms and processes
and through wider government and non-government programs and measures, such as
conservation covenants, management advice, assistance, agreements and funding incentives
(including State land tax and local rate incentives).
(ii) Only support future rural-living subdivision for conservation and rural development
(including a single residential building envelope) in areas not already committed or approved
for development where appropriate having particular regard to the best practice criteria
identified in Appendix 3, subject to other planning and environmental considerations.

22 June 2010 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2751
(iii) Seek opportunities for improved environmental outcomes for intensive rural-living
subdivision (ie lots generally below 10 hectares) or development with existing planning or
environmental commitments or approvals.
5.1.2.5 BFA—Regional creeklines
Application: Regionally significant bushland within the Regional creeklines site implementation
category on map 1 (and any subsequent amendments).
Proposals or decision-making should—
(i) Support the protection and management of regionally significant bushland, and any related
buffer and foreshore requirements, along regional creeklines in accordance with other
relevant government Acts, policies and initiatives.
(ii) Support a general presumption against the clearing of regionally significant bushland along
regional creeklines, subject to other relevant government Acts, policies and initiatives.
(iii) Ensure that any future subdivision retains regionally significant bushland along creeklines
within a single lot, where possible, and avoids lot boundaries severing regionally significant
bushland.
5.2 Local bushland
Application: All areas of bushland outside Bush Forever areas within the Perth Metropolitan Region.
Local government should—
(i) Seek to prepare a local bushland protection strategy, which should—
(a) be part of a wider local biodiversity strategy (which may include an assessment of local
natural areas) or similar, where possible;
(b) be a component of a wider local planning strategy, where possible, and as part of a
review of a local government town planning scheme, or as an independent strategy
where there are significant issues and pressures relevant to the protection of local
bushland, while taking into consideration the broader planning framework;
(c) be based on metropolitan-wide guidelines endorsed by the WAPC;
(d) identify, or establish processes to identify significant bushland sites for protection and
management based on environmental, social and economic criteria and taking into
consideration existing approvals and commitments—in particular, site identification
should utilise structure planning and rezoning processes and avoid onerous information
requirements at the detailed planning stage;
(e) identify decision-making processes and include an implementation strategy to protect
those sites recommended for protection and management through a range of
mechanisms;
(f) be in consultation with affected landowners, the broader community, the WAPC and
other relevant government agencies;
(g) exclude the Conservation Commission of WA managed conservation estate and parks
and recreation reserves in the Metropolitan Region Scheme, which are part of the State
reserve system and are of regional importance; and
(h) be formally considered and endorsed by council and the WAPC, with particular
reference to the policy measures listed above.
(ii) As an interim measure, prior to formal endorsement of a local bushland protection strategy,
local government should seek to identify and protect significant bushland through other
planning processes or studies, such as structure planning and rezoning processes.
The lack of a formally endorsed local bushland protection strategy should not, in itself, be a
reason to refuse a planning proposal. Each proposal should be considered on its merits, with
particular regard to specific policy measure 5.2 (iv) below, and existing planning processes or
studies that identify significant bushland for protection.
Proposals or decision-making should—
(iii) Have regard to the protection of significant bushland sites recommended for protection and
management in an endorsed local bushland protection strategy or through other planning
processes or studies that have been formally endorsed by council and the WAPC.
(iv) Support a general presumption against the clearing of bushland, or other degrading
activities, for area’s containing—
• the environmental values identified in Appendix 2 (ix) b; and
• System 6 recommendation areas (Department of Conservation and Environment
(1983), Conservation Reserves for Western Australia), the Conservation Commission of
WA conservation estate and parks and recreation reserves in the Metropolitan Region
Scheme outside the Swan Coastal Plain portion of the Perth Metropolitan Region,
except where it is in accordance with the exemptions identified in policy measure
5.1.2.1 (i).
(v) Proactively seek to safeguard, enhance and establish ecological linkages between Bush
Forever areas; and between Bush Forever areas and those areas identified for protection
through the implementation of the specific policy measures in this section.

2752 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 22 June 2010
6. IMPLEMENTATION
The purpose of this policy is to guide and inform agencies, authorities, landowners and the broader
community on bushland protection and management issues that are to be taken into account and
given effect by the WAPC and local governments when considering a planning proposal or in
undertaking any decision-making affecting significant bushland areas.
With regard to regionally significant bushland, a Bush Forever area has been established as an
overlay in the Metropolitan Region Scheme to alert the public and to identify regionally significant
bushland protection that overlap zone and reserve boundaries and requires special consideration
through the application of this Policy. Related requirements have been established in notice of
delegation under the Western Australian Planning Commission Act 1985, which establishes
development control requirements under the Metropolitan Region Scheme. The Bush Forever area
also provides a basis for planning policy to operate in conjunction with the statutory clearing controls
under the Environmental Protection Act 1986.
Proposals will be judged on their merits with decision-making bodies having due regard to the policy
measures in this policy and other planning and environmental considerations. Where a proposal or
decision-making is likely to have an unavoidable adverse impact on regionally significant bushland
within a Bush Forever area, the impact assessment process outlined in Appendix 1 will apply.
Significant adverse impacts will trigger additional information requirements. As part of this
approach, this policy seeks to closely align land use planning with environmental protection and
management to secure long-term, improved environmental outcomes through planning processes and
decision-making, set within the context of wider social and economic considerations.
The onus is on the proponent to provide sufficient evidence and to demonstrate to the decision-making
body that a proposal or decision is consistent with this policy or that a deviation is justified. Early
consultation with the decision-making body is recommended. Any proposal that deviates from this
policy will not be supported without overriding justification. Statements of fact, conclusions or
theories used to justify arguments should be substantiated or supported by technical work. Where
this is not provided, the decision-making body may request further scientific information or refuse the
proposal on the basis that it is not supported by sufficient technical arguments.
The policy will also integrate and co-ordinate the activities of other agencies and bodies that influence
the use and development of land. This policy does not constrain the independence of other statutory
decision-making bodies or remove the obligation to obtain the necessary approvals under other
legislation. However, in accordance with the Environment Protection Authority Bulletin 1007
(Environmental Protection Authority 2001, 2003a), it is expected that if a proposal achieves a
reasonable conservation outcome in compliance with this policy, it is unlikely to be formally assessed
under part IV of the Environmental Protection Act 1986, unless there are other significant
environmental factors requiring assessment.
The State Government will provide support to local governments in the preparation of strategies,
schemes, policies and plans to address the issues raised in this policy. Most development control
powers under the Metropolitan Region Scheme are delegated to local government, but the WAPC
retains specific powers and certain developments are exempt from the need to obtain development
approval under the Metropolitan Region Scheme. With the introduction of Bush Forever areas,
development control delegation provisions to local government under the notice of delegation are
retained. Subdivision powers reside with the WAPC.
As noted above, under amendments to the Environmental Protection Act 1986, clearing of native
vegetation in Western Australia generally requires a clearing permit, submitted to, and approved by
the Department of Environment and Conservation. This does not replace the need for planning to
consider native vegetation in decision-making as clearing permit exemptions apply to some planning
approvals, such as a subdivision approval, and the planning decision-making body is required to have
due regard to this policy.
Prior to making a development control decision that involves the clearing of native vegetation within
a Bush Forever area, local authorities are advised to consult with the Department of Environment
and Conservation regarding vegetation-clearing aspects, where appropriate. This process facilitates
closer integration of decision-making under separate legislation where development involves clearing.
Further guidance on the policy measures and requirements of this policy is proposed. These should be
read in conjunction with this policy. The policy will be monitored on an ongoing basis and reviewed as
required or at least within five years of its operation.
————

22 June 2010 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2753
Figure 1
SPP 2.8: POLICY MEASURES FRAMEWORK

2754 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 22 June 2010
Figure 2
SPP 2.8: IMPACT ASSESSMENT PROCESS FOR BUSH FOREVER AREAS (BFA)
————

22 June 2010 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2755
Appendix 1
BUSH FOREVER AREAS (ALL)
IMPACT ASSESSMENT PROCESS
This appendix applies to any proposal or decision-making that is likely to have an unavoidable
adverse impact on regionally significant bushland within a Bush Forever area consistent with the
requirements of the policy (specific policy measure 5.1.1 iii). Figure 2 provides guidance on the impact
assessment process.
All reasonable steps should be taken to avoid and minimise any likely adverse impacts in the first
instance. However, where there is likely to be an unavoidable adverse impact on regionally significant
bushland within a Bush Forever area consistent with the requirements of this policy, the planning
assessment process outlined below will be adopted. The proponent should determine what the likely
level of impact on regionally significant bushland will be in consultation with the decision-making
body and shall provide sufficient information, as outlined below, to permit an assessment by the
decision-making body.
The purpose of the planning assessment process is to ensure the appropriate integration of bushland
protection considerations in decision-making by ensuring planning decisions are supported by the
best available information and decision criteria, in order to promote ecologically sustainable design
outcomes.
Ideally, the assessment process should be employed early in the planning process and at a broad
strategic level to achieve the best outcomes.
Accompanying material
Significant impacts
A statement of environmental effects shall be prepared by the proponent where there is likely to be a
significant adverse impact on regionally significant bushland within a Bush Forever area.
The statement of environmental effects shall include, but is not limited to, the following information
requirements—
(i) provide evidence and demonstrate that a proposal or decision is consistent with this policy, in
particular the planning assessment criteria set out in Appendix 2;
(ii) describe and provide a rationale and planning context for the proposal;
(iii) describe the impacted area’s bushland values and environmental attributes (to be consistent
with the information sets in Bush Forever and with reference to the site descriptions therein;
and Environmental Protection Authority Guidance Statements 51 and 56 (EPA 2003b and
2003c), where appropriate);
(iv) demonstrate that all reasonable steps have been taken to avoid or minimise any likely
adverse impacts consistent with the requirements of this policy, including a review of
reasonable alternatives and details of any bushland-sensitive design measures to be adopted;
(v) provide an evaluation of and justification for any likely adverse impacts;
(vi) provide an environmental and/or bushland management plan, where appropriate, and details
of proposed conservation management measures to be adopted; or, where agreed, the
environmental and/or bushland management plan or related measures may be a requirement
through the statutory planning process; and
(vii) provide details of proposed long-term protection, management, offset measures and
implementation commitments to be adopted.
Where this is not required as part of the normal planning process, the statement of environmental
effects may be made available to the public.
Minimal impacts
Where there is likely to be a minimal adverse impact on regionally significant bushland within a
Bush Forever area, sufficient information shall be presented by the proponent to enable an
assessment of the impacts of a proposal or decision-making on the bushland values of the site; shall
demonstrate that the proposal has been designed to avoid or minimise impacts and will not cause a
significant impact; is consistent with this policy; and shall provide details of any proposed design,
protection and management measures to be adopted.
The decision-making body may waive the information requirements set out above for significant and
minimal impacts and modify or request additional information, as appropriate. Further guidance on
the above information requirements is proposed to supplement this policy.
The above information requirements do not remove the need for other information requirements to
support a planning decision and may form part of a planning proposal (such as a structure plan or
town planning scheme amendment), or for information required through other policies or legislation,
and by other agencies.
Matters to be considered
Where there is likely to be an adverse impact on regionally significant bushland within a Bush
Forever area, the decision-making body will have regard to the policy measures in this policy, and
shall have particular regard to the impact assessment criteria (Appendix 2) as a basis for a
determining a reasonable outcome and the acceptability of a proposal.

2756 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 22 June 2010
The policy measures and decision criteria in this policy apply in addition to normal planning and
environmental considerations.
The extent to which the above information requirements and criteria apply, and the weight given to
them, will depend on the circumstances of each case, with regard to—
(i) what is appropriate and reasonable;
(ii) the scale and nature of the proposal and its level of impacts;
(iii) the bushland values of the subject site, particularly its sensitivity and significance;
(iv) the level of decision-making and stage in the planning process;
(v) planning and environmental opportunities and constraints;
(vi) the landowner’s future intentions and capacity to deliver any requirements; and
(vii) the advice received from any person, organisation or government agency consulted.
————
Appendix 2
BUSH FOREVER AREAS (ALL)
IMPACT ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
As part of the impact assessment process outlined in Appendix 1, the decision-making body shall have
particular regard to the following impact assessment criteria as a basis for determining a reasonable
outcome and the acceptability of a proposal.
For significant adverse impacts, the proponent shall be required to supply evidence and demonstrate
to the decision-making body that a proposal or decision is consistent with the criteria.
While not constraining or obviating the need for approvals under other legislation, the criteria and
outcome achieved will be a consideration in environmental approval processes.
The impact assessment criteria are as follows—
Site implementation considerations
(i) Have particular regard to a Bush Forever area’s site implementation category and any
associated specific policy measures in this policy (section 5.1.2), as applicable.
(ii) Seek bushland protection outcomes early in the planning process and wider strategic
outcomes, including the use of local planning strategies, structure planning and land co-
ordination mechanisms, or the consideration of a number of land assets as part of a strategic
package (including those areas of indigenous heritage value).
(iii) Recognise the regional and strategic targets, objectives and implementation guidelines
contained in Bush Forever and its related Practice Notes (Government of Western Australia
2000a and b).
(iv) Recognise existing planning or environmental commitments or approvals (including those
relating to Aboriginal heritage sites within the meaning of the Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972),
and future commitments and approvals that are made through formal planning and
environmental processes in compliance with this policy.
(v) Support future development or land uses in areas not already subject to an existing planning
or environmental commitment or approval that is compatible with this policy and bushland
protection or provides for an improved environmental outcome.
(vi) Recognise the protection of regionally significant bushland as part of an integrated and
balanced environmental, social and economic outcome and encourage sustainability
assessments consistent with the State Sustainability Strategy (2003), where possible.
(vii) Recognise the viability of appropriate development consistent with this policy, based on
evidence supplied to the decision-making body.
(viii) Support a general presumption against future urban, industrial or resource development in
areas not already subject to an existing planning or environmental commitment, approval or
policy (which includes resource extraction outside priority resource locations, key extraction
areas and extraction areas identified in the State Planning Policy 2.4: Basic raw materials
(Government of Western Australia 2000)), unless there is an improved environmental
outcome.
Conservation and design considerations
(ix) Have regard to the conservation values of the subject site and seek to protect the core
(highest) conservation values in the following ways—
(a) Protect bushland with the highest conservation value, with reference to the site’s
bushland values and environmental attributes (to be identified in the statement of
environmental effects, where required); and, the selection criteria for regionally
significant bushland and site descriptions in Bush Forever (Government of Western
Australia, 2000c).

22 June 2010 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2757
(b) Seek to avoid unacceptable losses, which includes a general presumption against
clearing bushland, or other degrading activities, for area’s containing—
• threatened ecological communities and species listed under the Commonwealth’s
Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Act 1999;
• an ecological community that has been determined by the Minister for the
Environment to be a threatened ecological community, and is referred to in the list of
threatened ecological communities maintained by the Chief Executive of the
Department principally assisting in the administration of the Conservation and Land
Management Act 1984;
• threatened and poorly reserved plant communities (preliminary maps,
Environmental Protection Authority, 1994);
• declared rare flora or specially protected fauna; and, where possible, priority or
significant flora or fauna;
• lakes or wetlands listed in the Environmental Protection (Swan Coastal Plain Lakes)
Policy 1992 and the Revised Draft Environmental Protection (Swan Coastal Plain
Wetlands) Policy and Regulations 2004, and other significant vegetated wetlands
(most notably conservation category wetlands as identified by the Department of
Environment’s Geomorphic Wetlands Swan Coastal Plain dataset and recognised
Aboriginal sites), and appropriate buffer and foreshore requirements consistent with
other relevant government polices;
• vegetation complexes where less than 10 per cent of the original extent currently
remains (this generally correlates with vegetation on the eastern side of the Swan
Coastal Plain portion of the Perth Metropolitan Region); and
• wetland dependent vegetation fringing creeks, rivers and estuaries and appropriate
buffer and foreshore requirements in accordance with other relevant government
policies and initiatives.
This general presumption is subject to—
• on-site verification, where required, of the values, presence, condition and boundaries
of bushland and wetland areas—to be prepared as part of the statement of
environmental effects, where required, and consistent with guidelines prepared by
the Environment Protection Authority (2003b and 2003c), where appropriate;
• an assessment of the bushland’s long-term viability, such as size, shape, connectivity
and key threatening processes;
• consideration of other impact assessment criteria in this appendix and other relevant
policy measures in this policy; and
• any advice received from key State government agencies with regard to other
statutory requirements and policies.
(x) Seek to adopt and implement any relevant bushland-sensitive design measures (with
particular reference to Bush Forever, Practice Notes 5 and 10, Government of Western
Australia 2000b), particularly—
• seek to avoid or minimise any likely adverse impacts (including a review of reasonable
alternatives) and maximise the retention of regionally significant bushland, consistent
with the requirements of this policy, through best-practice planning, design and
management outcomes;
• focus development within cleared, degraded and less intact areas of native vegetation
and minimise the development “footprint”;
• seek to avoid fragmentation of the bushland area and provide for ecological linkages
and ‘stepping stones’; and
• seek to achieve a viable conservation outcome, with reference to bushland size, shape,
connectivity, diversity, representation, development interface and edge effects, key
threatening processes, environmental limits and the ability of the conservation area to
retain biodiversity values in the long-term.
Long-term protection and management considerations
(xi) Require long-term protection and management measures for regionally significant bushland
identified for protection and management through this process, which include, but are not
limited to—
• a statutory conservation covenant and associated management plan;
• the preparation and implementation of an environmental and/or bushland
management plan, or similar, to manage the bushland for conservation purposes, which
should be linked and enforced through either the local government town planning
scheme, a legal agreement and/or conservation covenant;
• a management agreement to protect and control use and development within the
bushland, to be secured through a legal agreement;
• statutory planning controls, including conditions of approval, local government town
planning scheme rezoning and scheme provisions, which are designed to protect and
manage the bushland area;
• setting aside regionally significant bushland as a conservation reserve (usually free of
cost) for management by a public body; and/or

2758 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 22 June 2010
• land donation to an accredited nature conservation trust to enable a Federal income tax
deduction at market value.
Offset considerations
(xii) Where a proposal cannot avoid negatively impacting a Bush Forever area, the applicant
needs to provide documentation showing how they minimised the impact. If any clearing of
native vegetation within the Bush Forever area is to occur, then the applicant needs to
provide proposed offset measures (both on-site and off-site), where appropriate and practical,
with particular reference to the following site implementation categories—
• BFA—Bush Forever reserves; or
• BFA—Government lands or public infrastructure.
The offset package should provide for a net environmental gain (see Appendix 4 for a
breakdown of the offset requirements).
Other considerations
(xiii) Take into account any significant issues arising from the statement of environmental effects,
where required.
(xiv) Have regard to other relevant policy measures within this policy, and other planning and
environmental considerations (including fire protection and control requirements and the
protection of Aboriginal heritage sites recognised by the Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972).
————
Appendix 3
BUSH FOREVER AREAS (RURAL LANDS)
BEST PRACTICE CRITERIA FOR RURAL LIVING SUBDIVISION AND
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
This appendix applies to future rural-living subdivision for conservation and rural development under
the rural lands site implementation category (specific policy measures 5.1.2.4 ii).
In order to facilitate private land management for conservation and secure long-term protection, this
policy supports future rural-living subdivision for conservation and rural development (including a
single residential building envelope), where appropriate, subject to other planning and environmental
considerations.
When considering rural subdivision and development the decision-making body shall have particular
regard to the following best practice criteria, which apply in addition to the impact assessment
criteria in Appendix 2—
(i) There is an overall bushland retention benchmark of generally not less than 90 per cent for
each lot, or for the whole site where multiple lots are proposed, except where there are
cleared, degraded or less intact areas, which should be developed first.
(ii) The proposal is supported by suitable site-specific long-term protection and management
measures through statutory planning controls (notably local town planning scheme
provisions) that aim to secure an improved environmental outcome.
These should include, but are not limited to, one or a combination of the following measures,
subject to the circumstances of each case—
(a) no clearing, grazing or development to be permitted outside a designated development
envelope, except where it is associated with essential services or infrastructure;
(b) subdivision and development to be in accordance with an approved subdivision or
development guide plan, which shall include the location of development envelopes
within cleared or degraded areas, where possible, and one dwelling per lot;
(c) once an initial subdivision has occurred in accordance with the criteria set out in
Appendix 3 of this policy, there will be a presumption against further subdivision;
(d) rural development should be consistent with local government town planning scheme
zoning requirements, but statutory planning controls should restrict land uses and
development that are likely to be incompatible with the bushland protection objectives
and requirements of this policy, with particular reference to any current permitted uses
under a local government town planning scheme, for example, agriculture, market
gardens, horticultural, grazing and the keeping of livestock may be considered to be
discretionary uses in the scheme and should be contained within cleared and/or
degraded areas and within designated development envelopes, with consideration given
to any indirect adverse impacts;
(e) a statutory conservation covenant to be placed on the title of each lot;
(f) areas being set aside as a conservation reserve and vested with an appropriate
management body under section 152 of the Planning and Development Act 2005 where
appropriate, with particular reference to area’s containing conservation values
identified in Appendix 2 (ix) b;
(g) future landowner/s to be notified of the existence of regionally significant bushland and
related controls and provisions;

22 June 2010 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2759
(h) an environmental and/or bushland management plan, or similar, is prepared and
implemented to manage the land for conservation purposes, which should be linked and
enforced through either the local government town planning scheme, a legal agreement
or conservation covenant;
(i) the preparation and implementation of whole-of-site management plans for areas
within multiple ownerships, where possible, as a framework for more detailed
management plans for individual landowners;
(j) a management agreement to protect and control use and development within the
bushland, to be secured through a legal agreement; and
(k) relevant bushland-sensitive design measures to be adopted (with particular reference
to Bush Forever Practice Note 10, Government of Western Australia 2000b) and
implemented consistent with the bushland values of the site, such as the location, size
and design of building envelopes, fencing, firebreaks, access ways and servicing
requirements.
(iii) Lot sizes for rural living subdivision will be considered on their merits, with an emphasis on
the creation of large bush blocks, generally over 10 hectares. However, lot sizes will be
dependent upon, but not limited to, consideration of the following—
(a) the conservation values and characteristics of the site;
(b) a presumption against intensive rural-living subdivision (ie lots generally below 4
hectares), except where it forms part of a planning solution designed to secure an
improved environmental outcome, such as an averaging of lot sizes, the ceding of land
as a conservation reserve for management by an appropriate body, the creation of some
smaller lots within cleared or degraded areas combined with a larger lot for the core
conservation area, and/or cluster-style rural subdivision and development; or it is in
accordance with existing planning or environmental commitments or approvals;
(c) the current size of the subject lot and its surrounds; and
(d) in the event of any inconsistencies with current lot size requirements, the following
shall generally prevail, subject to other planning and environmental considerations—
• where a there is a current minimum lot size below 10 hectares, there is an
expectation for larger lots consistent with the criteria set out in Appendix 3 of this
policy; or
• where there is a current minimum lot size above 10 hectares, this is supported, but if
a lot is incapable of subdivision because of its current size, subdivision to create one
additional lot may be supported, subject to the criteria set out in Appendix 3 of this
policy.
(iv) A complementary local government town planning scheme rezoning amendment is prepared
and implemented, where appropriate, to facilitate the application and implementation of the
measures identified in (i) to (iii) above and more detailed site-specific controls and provisions,
provided they are consistent with this policy as a minimum requirement.
(v) Should agreement not be reached, or where it is considered the most appropriate option, the
WAPC may opt (subject to agreement of the landowner and the availability of funds) to
purchase the land and covenant and on-sell it to a landowner who is willing to manage the
land for conservation. In some cases, the land may be reconfigured and/or subdivided to
optimise the conservation outcome, to separate the cleared areas from the conservation
component, or for marketing purposes; or shall be retained by the WAPC to form part of a
BFA—Bush Forever reserve.
(vi) Other relevant policy measures in this policy and other planning and environmental
considerations, in particular, fire protection and control requirements and aboriginal heritage
considerations.
Please also refer to Bush Forever, Practice Notes 7 to 12, Government of Western Australia 2000b.
————
Appendix 4
OFFSETS CRITERIA
SUMMARY OF OFFSET CRITERIA GRADED ACCORDING TO
CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE
(adapted from Victoria’s Native Vegetation Management—A Framework for Action and
addresses mitigation as required in section 5.1.1 (ii) and Planning Bulletin 69 and
EPA Position Statement No. 9)
Conservation
Very High High Medium Low
Significance
Response to Based on the environmental attributes of the site on a case-by-case basis, assessing
proposal to attributes such as vegetation complex type, presence of TEC/DRF/priority flora/fauna, CCW
clear and offset and condition of vegetation.
Presumption against the Clearing Clearing generally Clearing may be
clearing of any regionally generally not not permitted. permitted but only

2760 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 22 June 2010
Conservation
Very High High Medium Low
Significance
significant vegetation, permitted. as part of an
except where the proposal appropriate
is consistent with the sustainable use
intent of the reserve, or response as
has existing determined by the
environmental or planning responsible
commitments or planning authority.
approvals. All reasonable
steps should be taken to
avoid, and minimise any
impacts on the bushland.
If some clearing is to be permitted, the following offset requirements must be met
Net Substantial net gain Net gain Equivalent gain Equivalent gain
Outcome i.e. at least 2 x the calculated i.e. at least 1.5 i.e. at least 1 x the i.e. at least 1 x the
loss in habitat hectares 1 x the calculated loss in calculated loss in
calculated loss habitat hectares 1, 2 habitat hectares 1, 2
in habitat
hectares 1
Formal Requirements to achieve offsets must be identified in the associated management agreements
agreement and / or the permit conditions.
to achieve
Gains must be of an on-going and secure nature. Once achieved the offset must be maintained
and secure
and the relevant planning authorities must maintain adequate and readily accessible records of
offset
agreed offset arrangements.
1 Gains can include active improvements of quality and/or avoiding potential losses of quality by agreement to
forego permitted uses. Note that applying all of the following offset criteria (where relevant) may require more
than the minimum habitat hectares specified by these multipliers.
2 Where gains are achieved in vegetation/habitat of a higher significance than the vegetation lost, then the amount
of the offset will be proportionally reduced (e.g. offsetting losses in medium conservation significance with very
high conservation significance gains will reduce the amount of the offsets required by half, i.e. the medium
multiplier divided by the very high multiplier).
Conservation
Very High High Medium Low
Significance
Like-for-Like
Vegetation or The same vegetation / The same vegetation / habitat type OR a Very High significance
habitat type of habitat type vegetation / habitat in the same Bioregion.
offset
Landscape role Similar or more Similar or more Similar or more effective land protection
effective ecological effective ecological function as impacted by the loss.
function AND land function AND land
protection function as protection function
impacted by the loss. as impacted by the
loss.
Quality The existing vegetation The existing The existing vegetation proposed as the
objectives for proposed as the basis of vegetation basis of an offset must be at least 50% of
offset an offset must be at proposed as the the quality in the area being lost.
least 90% of the quality basis of an offset
in the area being lost. must be at least
70% of the quality
in the area being
lost.
The proportion of revegetation included in the offset (in habitat hectares) is limited to
10% 25% 50% 100%
Large old tree For remnant patches of native vegetation that contain large mature trees 4
objective for
offset 4 For each large mature tree removed as part of the permitted clearing 3
8 other large mature 4 other large 2 other large No specific “other
trees to be protected mature trees to be mature trees to be large mature tree”
AND 40 new trees to be protected AND 20 protected AND 10 protection required.
planted 5. new trees to be new trees to be
planted 5. planted 5.
For each medium mature tree removed as part of permitted clearing 3
4 other large mature 2 other large 1 other large 5 new trees to be
trees to be protected mature trees to be mature trees to be planted 5.
AND 20 new trees to be protected AND 10 protected AND 5
planted 5. new trees to be new trees to be
planted 5. planted 5.

22 June 2010 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2761
Conservation
Very High High Medium Low
Significance
Vicinity Gains must be in the same bioregion as the loss OR an adjacent bioregion if offsets are in
Very High or High significance vegetation.
Timing Offsets to be initiated prior to the loss
3 These offsets are only required as a consequence of native vegetation clearing which requires and receives a
clearing permit, and not where tree removal is exempt from the requirement to have such a permit.
4 Mature trees, large or medium, are defined as individuals of key long-lived dominant tree species that are
greater than certain diameters (for large or medium) at 1.3 metres above ground level
5 On a case-by-case basis at the discretion of the planning or environment authority, this requirement to plant new
trees may be either through plantings to a prescribed standard (e.g. species composition, density, survivorship)
and/or through regeneration associated with protection of other mature trees.
————
GLOSSARY
Adverse impact—is a harmful effect and will generally involve, but is not limited to—
• a direct impact on a Bush Forever area through the clearing of regionally significant
bushland; or
• a significant indirect impact on a Bush Forever area through development directly abutting
regionally significant bushland that is likely to result in, but not limited to, significant
hydrological impacts, the spread of dieback, direct drainage into regionally significant
bushland, significant access and weed infestation issues, fire management issues and other
significant management implications or threatening processes arising from development.
Bushland is land on which there is vegetation which is either a remainder of the natural vegetation
of the land, or, if altered, is still representative of the structure and floristics of the natural
vegetation, and provides the necessary habitat for native fauna (Bush Forever, Government of
Western Australia 2000a and 2000c).
Bush Forever areas refer to a classification of land in the Metropolitan Region Scheme (established
through Metropolitan Region Scheme Amendment 1082/33) to protect and manage regionally
significant bushland in accordance with this Policy.
Bush Forever reserves (existing or proposed) site implementation category includes lands reserved
or proposed to be reserved for parks and recreation in the Metropolitan Region Scheme; areas of the
conservation estate vested with the Conservation Commission of Western Australia; and/or Crown
reserves and local government town planning scheme reserves vested for conservation, or similar.
These lands are regarded to be lands with some level of protection (existing or proposed) and are
currently within or intended for public ownership and management.
Bush Forever sites are specific localities identified and described in Bush Forever as endorsed by
Cabinet (Government of Western Australia, 2000), which identify regionally significant bushland
recommended for protection.
Decision-making bodies are public authorities empowered to make a planning decision in respect
of a proposal, including, for the purpose of this policy, the WAPC or local government. Non-planning
agencies have decision-making responsibilities under other legislation and, as such, they may have
regard to but cannot be fettered by this policy.
Government lands or public infrastructure site implementation category includes State,
Commonwealth or local government lands in freehold ownership, or vested Crown reserves; and
public infrastructure on lands zoned and reserved in the Metropolitan Region Scheme. This generally
includes lands in the government lands, major road and railway reserves, cemeteries and local town
planning scheme reserve implementation categories in Bush Forever.
Improved environmental outcome is where a proposal or decision-making, consistent with the
requirements of this policy, provides for, but is not limited to—
• “no net loss” or a “net gain” of regionally significant bushland (on-site or off-site) protected
and/or managed for conservation purposes;
• a large or significant area (on-site or off-site) of unprotected regionally significant bushland in
a Bush Forever area (this will generally involve regionally significant bushland outside the
BFA—Bush Forever reserves site implementation category) is protected and/or managed
(which includes, but is not limited to rehabilitation, revegetation or regeneration) for
conservation purposes, while allowing some development in accordance with existing
approvals and commitments or an outcome consistent with the impact assessment criteria in
this policy (Appendix 2); or
• improved management of the regionally significant bushland for conservation purposes,
which includes, but is not limited to rehabilitation, revegetation or regeneration.
Local bushland strategies are prepared by or for local government to identify locally significant
bushland sites for protection and management. Local bushland strategies focus on bushland areas
and are not intended to cover parkland cleared areas, isolated trees in cleared settings or local
natural areas. However, they may form part of a local biodiversity strategy, or similar, which
recognise the importance of local natural areas of native vegetation that do not fall within the
definition of bushland, or naturally non-vegetated environments

2762 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 22 June 2010
Management plans may be either of the following—
Bushland management plans
These contain specific and detailed guidelines for the management of natural areas. They cover
matters such as the nurturing or reintroduction of native species and procedures for the
mitigation of adverse influences such as weeds, fire and feral animals (Government of Western
Australia, 2000a).
Environmental management plans
These contain specific or detailed guidelines on the management of any likely adverse impacts of
development on natural areas, and how these impacts are to be avoided, minimised, managed and
monitored prior to and during the construction phase of the proposed development and post
development. They may include, through an action plan, environmental management measures
or commitments to address any likely adverse impacts to ensure the conservation values of the
bushland are maintained.
Mitigate is used in this policy to refer to reasonable steps to avoid, minimise or offset any likely
adverse impacts.
The Environment Protection Authority refers to a sequence of considerations designed to help manage
environmental impacts, which includes (in order of preference) avoidance, minimisation, rectification,
reduction and offsets (EPA Position Statement No. 9 Environmental Offset, January 2006 and EPA
Guidance Statement No. 19 Environmental Offsets, September 2008).
Natural Areas are naturally vegetated or non-vegetated areas such as water bodies (generally
rivers, lakes and estuaries), bare ground (generally sand or mud) and rock outcrops (Environment
Protection Authority 2003a), but excludes parkland cleared areas, isolated trees in cleared settings,
ovals and turfed areas (as adapted from the Western Australian Local Government Association,
2004).
Offsets: commonly referred to as “environmentally beneficial activities” undertaken to
counterbalance an environmental impact and achieve a “net environmental benefit” outcome. In
Position Statement No. 9 (EPA, 2006) these are discussed in terms of—
• Direct Offsets, which are environmentally beneficial activities undertaken to counterbalance
an adverse environmental impact or harm, with the goal of achieving a “net environmental
benefit”. Examples of direct offsets may include ecosystem restoration (offsite), rehabilitation
(offsite), land acquisition for conservation and re-establishment. See definition of “off-site”.
• Contributing Offsets, which are environmentally beneficial activities undertaken to
complement and enhance direct offset activities. Contributing offset activities may not
immediately assist in a “net environmental benefit” outcome, but instead materially add to
environmental knowledge, research, management and protection, and ultimately lead to
improved environmental outcomes.
Offsets package: the set of offset activities undertaken to counterbalance an adverse environmental
impact. It should consider direct and contributing offsets, as appropriate.
Proposals or decision-making are strategies, policies, town planning scheme zonings or
amendments, structure plans, master plans, subdivision, development applications, and any other
proposal or issue requiring a decision, request, action or application under planning legislation or as
part of the planning process. Other non-planning decision-making bodies under other legislation may
also have regard to this policy.
Protected bushland refers to bushland that is under a management regime that provides for its
continuing protection (Government of Western Australia 2000a).
Reasonable outcome—the definition will vary depending upon the circumstances of each case and
through the implementation of this policy, but with particular regard to the impact assessment
criteria in this policy (Appendix 2) and the specific policy measures for each Bush Forever area site
implementation category, as applicable.
Regional creeklines site implementation category includes mapped vegetation along regional
creeklines in private or public ownership and generally includes lands in the regional creekline
implementation category in Bush Forever.
Regionally Significant Bushland is all bushland (which may include wetland areas) within a Bush
Forever area, and other bushland outside a Bush Forever area that meets the Bush Forever criteria
for regional significance (Government of Western Australia 2000a and 2000c).
Bush Forever areas are based on Bush Forever sites and were initially selected using the criteria set
out in Bush Forever. The regionally significant bushland within a Bush Forever area as mapped on
map 1 in this policy, is based on Agriculture WA native vegetation mapping (2001) and is for
indicative purposes only and may be subject to on-site verification.
Regionally significant bushland outside Bush Forever areas may be protected through other
government policies and legislation.
Rural lands site implementation category primarily includes private rural zoned land in the
Metropolitan Region Scheme and generally includes lands in the rural complementary
implementation category in Bush Forever.
Urban, industrial or resource development site implementation category includes private or
public lands zoned for urban, urban deferred or industrial purposes in the Metropolitan Region
Scheme or committed for future development through planning and environmental processes, or lands
committed or approved for resource extraction (including any policy areas within SPP 2.4). This

22 June 2010 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 2763
generally includes lands in the urban, urban deferred, industrial, basic raw materials and titanium
minerals, and strategic negotiated planning solution implementation categories in Bush Forever.
Swan Coastal Plain—is a bioregion as defined by Thackway and Cresswell (1995) as part of the
Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation of Australia.
————
REFERENCES
Department of Conservation and Environment (1983, Conservation Reserves for Western Australia.
The Darling System—System 6, parts 1 and 2. Report 13. Department of Conservation and
Environment, Perth, Western Australia.
Department of Sustainability and Environment, Victoria (2002) Native Vegetation Management—A
Framework for Action.
Environmental Protection Authority (2000) Environmental Protection of Native Vegetation in Western
Australia. Position Statement No. 2. December 2000. Perth, Western Australia.
Environmental Protection Authority 2001, Advice on aspects of Bush Forever. Advice from the
Minister for the Environment from the EPA under Section 16(e) of the Environment Protection Act
1986. Bulletin 1007. January 2001, Perth, Western Australia.
Environmental Protection Authority 2003a, Guidance No. 10: Guidance for the Assessment of
Environmental Factors—Level of Assessment for Proposals Affecting Natural Areas within the System
6 Region and Swan Coastal Plain portion of System 1 region.
Environmental Protection Authority 2003b, Guidance No. 51: Guidance for the Assessment of
Environmental Factor: Terrestrial Flora and Vegetation Surveys for Environmental Impact
Assessment in Western Australia. June 2004.
Environmental Protection Authority 2003c, Guidance No. 56: Guidance for the Assessment of
Environmental Factors: Terrestrial Fauna Surveys for Environmental Impact Assessment in Western
Australia. June 2004.
Environmental Protection Authority 2006, Position Statement No. 9 Environmental Offset.
Environmental Protection Authority 2008, Guidance Statement No. 19 Environmental Offsets.
Government of Western Australia 1998, Perth’s Bushplan. Western Australian Planning Commission,
Perth, Western Australia.
Government of Western Australia 2000a, Bush Forever Volume 1, Western Australian Planning
Commission, Perth, Western Australia.
Government of Western Australia 2000b, Bush Forever Volume 1, Appendix 3, Site Implementation
Guidelines Practice Notes, Western Australian Planning Commission, Perth, Western Australia.
Government of Western Australia 2000c, Bush Forever Volume 2, Department of Environmental
Protection, Perth, Western Australia.
Government of Western Australia 2003, Hope for the Future: The Western Australia State
Sustainability Strategy, Department of Premier and Cabinet, Perth, WA.
New South Wales Department of Land and Water Conservation 2001, Offsets, Salinity and Native
Vegetation Discussion Paper.
Tingay, A and Associates 1998, A Strategic Plan for Perth’s Greenway Final Report. Prepared for
Environment Australia, Ministry for Planning, Department of Conservation and Land Management,
WA Municipal Association, Department of Environmental Protection, Water and Rivers Commission,
Main Roads WA, Swan Catchment Centre, Conservation Council, Greening Australia and the
Australian Trust for Conservation Volunteers.
Western Australian Local Government Association 2004, Local Government Biodiversity Planning
Guidelines for the Perth Metropolitan Region. First Edition.
Western Australian Planning Commission (1997), State Planning Strategy, Perth, WA.
Western Australian Planning Commission 2003, Statement of Planning Policy 2: Environment and
Natural Resources policy, Perth, WA.
————

2764 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, WA 22 June 2010
Map 1
BUSH FOREVER AREAS